Title: Model Merging in the Era of Large Language Models: Methods, Applications, and Future Directions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.09938v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 01:25:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
Preprint. 

# Model Merging in the Era of Large Language Models: Methods, Applications, and Future Directions 

Mingyang Song & Mao Zheng 

Large Language Model Department Tencent, China 

nickmysong@tencent.com 

## Abstract 

Model merging has emerged as a transformative paradigm for combining the capabilities of multiple neural networks into a single unified model without additional training. With the rapid proliferation of fine-tuned large language models (LLMs), merging techniques offer a computationally effi-cient alternative to ensembles and full retraining, enabling practitioners to compose specialized capabilities at minimal cost. This survey presents a comprehensive and structured examination of model merging in the LLM era through the FUSE taxonomy, a four-dimensional framework organized along Foundations, Unification Strategies, Scenarios, and Ecosystem. We first establish the theoretical underpinnings of merging, including loss landscape geometry, mode connectivity, and the linear mode connectiv-ity hypothesis. We then systematically review the algorithmic landscape, spanning weight averaging, task vector arithmetic, sparsification-enhanced methods, mixture-of-experts architectures, and evolutionary optimization approaches. For each method family, we analyze the core formulation, highlight representative works, and discuss practical trade-offs. We fur-ther examine downstream applications across multi-task learning, safety alignment, domain specialization, multilingual transfer, and federated learning. Finally, we survey the supporting ecosystem of open-source tools, community platforms, and evaluation benchmarks, and identify key open challenges including theoretical gaps, scalability barriers, and standardiza-tion needs. This survey aims to equip researchers and practitioners with a structured foundation for advancing model merging. 

## 1 Introduction 

Model merging combines the parameters of multiple trained neural networks into a single unified model, inheriting their capabilities without inference-time ensemble overhead (Li et al., 2023a). Unlike ensembles that aggregate predictions from separate models at runtime, merging operates directly in weight space, yielding a single model whose cost matches any individual source. Early work showed that averaging parameters of models trained with different random seeds improves generalization performance (Izmailov et al., 2018). In the early days, these techniques were primarily applied to homogeneous models trained on identical datasets, with Stochastic Weight Averaging emerging as a principled approach for combining checkpoints along a single optimization trajectory (Garipov et al., 2018). With the advent of large-scale pretrained language model (Devlin et al., 2019)s, the scope of model merging expanded dramatically, enabling the combination of models fine-tuned for entirely different tasks into unified systems exhibiting multi-task capabilities (Ilharco et al., 2023). This evolution from checkpoint averaging to cross-task composition marks a shift in how the community conceptualizes neural network knowledge reuse. The emergence of pretrained foundation models such as LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a), Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023), Qwen (Hu et al., 2023), DeepSeek (Bi et al., 2024), Gemma (Team, 2024a), and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) has created conditions that make model merging both practically viable and scientifically compelling. The key insight is that models fine-1

> arXiv:2603.09938v1 [cs.CL] 10 Mar 2026

Preprint. tuned from a shared pretrained initialization tend to reside within the same loss basin, exhibiting linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) that permits direct weight in-terpolation without traversing high-loss barriers (Garipov et al., 2018). This theoretical grounding, combined with the proliferation of openly available fine-tuned large language models, has sparked substantial interest in merging methodologies. The past two years have witnessed an explosion of research activity, with novel techniques such as task vector arithmetic, sparsification-enhanced merging, and activation-informed (Hammoud et al., 2024) approaches achieving notable success in combining specialized models (Yadav et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024). Practically, merged models have achieved top rank-ings on competitive leaderboards including the Open LLM Leaderboard (Li et al., 2023b), demonstrating that strategic model combination can yield capabilities exceeding those of individual fine-tuned variants (Wortsman et al., 2022a; Jang et al., 2024). The establishment of dedicated toolkits such as mergekit (Goddard et al., 2024) has further democratized access to these techniques, enabling experiment with sophisticated merging strategies without extensive technical expertise. This confluence of theoretical understanding, empirical suc-cess, and practical tooling (Goddard et al., 2024) has positioned model merging as a central technique in modern LLM development. Several recent surveys have begun to address aspects of this rapidly evolving landscape. Yang et al. (2024b) and Li et al. (2023a) provide a broad treatment of model fusion techniques across deep learning, while Yadav et al. (2024a) focus specifically on mixture-of-experts style composition approaches. Yang et al. (2024b) examine collaborative strategies more broadly, encompassing both merging and ensemble methods. However, existing surveys lack a unified treatment that systematically connects theoretical foundations explaining why merging succeeds, algorithmic strategies for performing merging effectively, downstream application scenarios where merging provides value, and the practical ecosystem supporting deployment. No prior work has comprehensively addressed the full spectrum from loss landscape geometry and mode connectivity theory through to evaluation methodologies and community tooling, nor proposed a unified taxonomy for navigating this space. This survey provides a systematic treatment of model merging in the LLM era, bridging theoretical understanding with practical application. Table 1 summarizes the major open-weight foundation models (Brown et al., 2020; Team, 2024b) commonly used in merging research. As shown in Figure 2, our survey is organized around the FUSE taxonomy, a four-dimensional framework encompassing Foundations, Unification Strategies, Scenarios, and Ecosystem, that structures the field according to why merging works, how merging is performed, where merging provides value, and what resources support merging in practice. Figure 1 provides a schematic overview of the model merging pipeline. The main contri-butions of this survey are as follows: (1) We propose the FUSE taxonomy as a principled organizational framework that comprehensively categorizes model merging research across theoretical foundations including loss landscape geometry, mode connectivity, and weight space symmetries; algorithmic unification strategies spanning weight-space averaging, task vector arithmetic, geometric interpolation, and architecture-level composition; application scenarios including capability augmentation, alignment and safety, and efficiency-driven deployment; and ecosystem infrastructure encompassing toolkits, benchmark s, and com-munity resources. (2) We provide an in-depth technical analysis of merging methodologies, elucidating the mathematical principles underlying each approach and offering compara-tive insights into their respective strengths, limitations, and appropriate use cases. (3) We conduct a systematic examination of application domains, synthesizing empirical evidence regarding when and how model merging delivers practical benefits across multi-task gener-alization, multilingual transfer, preference alignment, and federated learning scenarios. (4) We identify open challenges and articulate promising future research (Li et al., 2025) direc-tions, including theoretical gaps in understanding mergeability, scalability limitations for increasingly large models, and opportunities for automated and dynamic merging systems. The remainder of this survey proceeds as follows: Section 2 establishes theoretical founda-tions; Sections 3–5 present unification strategies with increasing sophistication; Section 6 examines application scenarios; and Section 7 discusses the ecosystem, open challenges, and future directions. 2Preprint. Table 1: Overview of major open-weight foundation models (Brown et al., 2020; Team, 2024b) commonly used in model merging research. These models serve as the base for fine-tuning and subsequent merging experiments.                                                        

> Model Family Organization Parameters Year Architecture Key Features
> LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a) Meta 7B–65B 2023 Decoder-only RoPE, Pre-norm, SwiGLU LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023b) Meta 7B–70B 2023 Decoder-only GQA, Extended context LLaMA-3 (Team, 2024b) Meta 8B–405B 2024 Decoder-only 128K context, GQA Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023) Mistral AI 7B 2023 Decoder-only Sliding window attention Mixtral (Jiang et al., 2024) Mistral AI 8×7B 2024 Sparse MoE 8 experts, top-2 routing Qwen (Hu et al., 2023) Alibaba 1.8B–72B 2023 Decoder-only Multilingual, Code Qwen2 (Yang et al., 2024a) Alibaba 0.5B–72B 2024 Decoder-only GQA, Extended context DeepSeek (Bi et al., 2024) DeepSeek 7B–67B 2024 Decoder-only MHA, Scaling law design DeepSeek-V2 (DeepSeek-AI, 2024) DeepSeek 236B (21B active) 2024 MoE MLA, DeepSeekMoE Gemma (Team, 2024a) Google 2B–7B 2024 Decoder-only RoPE, Multi-Query Attn

θ0

θ1

θ2

θK

...

Weight Avg. (§3) 

Task Vectors (§4) 

MoE / Routing (§5) 

Search-Based (§5) 

θmerged Evaluation     

> PRETRAINED FINE -TUNED MERGING OUTPUT EVALUATE

Figure 1: Overview of the model merging pipeline. Task-specific models {θ1, . . . , θK },obtained by fine-tuning a shared pretrained checkpoint θ0, are combined via one of several strategies (Sections 3–5) into a single model θmerged , which is then evaluated on all source tasks. Gray vertical bars represent the many-to-many mapping between model inputs and merging strategies. 

## 2 Theoretical Foundations of Model Merging 

Why does model merging work? We examine three interconnected pillars: the geometric structure of loss landscapes that permits effective weight interpolation (Ren et al., 2025), the phenomenon of mode connectivity enabling low-loss paths between independently trained solutions (Draxler et al., 2018; Lubana et al., 2023), and weight-space symmetries, particularly permutation invariance (Jordan et al., 2022; Entezari et al., 2022), that must be resolved for effective merging (Ainsworth et al., 2023). 

2.1 Loss Landscape Geometry and Convexity Properties in Neural Networks 

The success of model merging fundamentally depends on the geometric properties of the loss landscape in which neural network parameters reside. Understanding this land-scape, particularly how loss values vary as one traverses the high-dimensional parameter space, provides essential insight into why weight interpolation between independently trained models can yield functional merged networks rather than catastrophic performance degradation. Neural network loss landscapes exhibit remarkably complex topologies characterized by numerous local minima, saddle points, and regions of varying curvature. However, a crucial observation that underpins model merging is that modern deep networks, partic-ularly when sufficiently overparameterized, display favorable geometric properties that deviate significantly from the pathological non-convex landscapes one might naively expect. Singh et al. (2024) provide a systematization of these landscape properties, demonstrating that overparameterization fundamentally alters the geometry of the optimization surface. Specifically, when parameters substantially outnumber the minimum required for the task, 3Preprint. 

## FUSE Taxonomy for Model Merging 

> F – Foundations
> • Loss Landscape • Mode Connectivity • Perm. Symmetry • Prerequisites
> U – Unification
> • Weight Averaging • Task Vectors • MoE Merging • Search-Based
> S – Scenarios
> • Multi-Task • Safety & Alignment • Federated Learning • Continual Adapt.
> E – Ecosystem
> • Toolkits • Benchmarks • Future Directions

Figure 2: The FUSE taxonomy. Foundations (§2): why merging works. Unification (§3–§5): 

how models are combined. Scenarios (§6): where merging applies. Ecosystem (§7): what 

supports deployment. the loss landscape exhibits large connected regions of near-optimal solutions rather than isolated minima. The concept of basin characteristics, encompassing both width and flatness, plays a central role in determining whether weight interpolation between two solutions will preserve model functionality. A loss basin can be formally characterized by considering the set of parameters Bϵ(θ∗) = {θ : L(θ) < L(θ∗) + ϵ} surrounding a local minimum θ∗. The width of this basin, often measured through the eigenspectrum of the Hessian matrix 

∇2L(θ∗), determines how much perturbations from the optimum increase loss. Wide, flat basins permit substantial movement in parameter space without significant performance degradation, directly enabling weight averaging. Garipov et al. (2018) investigated the empirical phenomenon of monotonic linear interpo-lation, wherein the loss along the linear path θα = ( 1 − α)θ1 + αθ 2 between two trained networks exhibits monotonically decreasing behavior toward the interpolated midpoint under certain conditions. This monotonicity property suggests that linear interpolation not only avoids catastrophic loss barriers but can actually discover solutions with lower loss than either endpoint, a finding with important implications for model merging strategies that rely on simple averaging operations. The relationship between loss landscape geometry and generalization performance intro-duces additional considerations for model merging. Flat minima, characterized by low curvature in the Hessian eigenspectrum, have been associated with improved generalization properties (Izmailov et al., 2018). When merging models that reside in flat regions of the loss landscape, the resulting averaged parameters are more likely to remain within a low-loss region, thereby preserving generalization capabilities. Conversely, sharp minima (Keskar et al., 2017) with high curvature present challenges for merging, as even small perturbations induced by averaging can push parameters into high-loss regions. Lubana et al. (2023) further examined the dynamics of weight interpolation, revealing that interpolated models can exhibit transient performance characteristics that differ from simple averaging predictions. Their analysis demonstrates that the geometry of the loss landscape along interpolation paths depends critically on training dynamics and the specific optimization trajectory taken to reach each solution. Mathematical analysis of overparameterized networks reveals that the loss surface increas-ingly resembles a high-dimensional valley structure as model capacity grows. Let M denote the manifold of global minima; in the overparameterized regime, M becomes a connected, often convex subspace (Tang et al., 2024d) within which arbitrary linear combinations of solutions remain optimal. This geometric insight, explored in (Ferbach et al., 2024), provides theoretical justification for why weight averaging succeeds when models share sufficient structural commonality, their solutions lie within the same connected low-loss region, rendering interpolation a geometrically valid operation (Neyshabur et al., 2020). 4Preprint. 

2.2 Linear Mode Connectivity Theory and Basin Characteristics 

The geometric insight that successful merging requires solutions to occupy connected low-loss regions naturally leads to the formal framework of mode connectivity, which provides a fundamental theoretical lens through which to understand when and why model merging succeeds. Mode connectivity refers to the existence of paths in weight space connecting different trained solutions along which the loss remains consistently low. This concept has emerged as central to explaining the empirical success of weight interpolation methods, as thoroughly surveyed in (Yang et al., 2024b). Formally, two neural network solutions θ1 and θ2 are said to exhibit linear mode connectiv-ity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) if the loss along the linear interpolation path θ(α) = ( 1 − α)θ1 + αθ 2

for α ∈ [0, 1 ] satisfies L(θ(α)) ≤ max (L(θ1), L(θ2)) + ϵ for some small tolerance ϵ ≥ 0. When ϵ = 0, the models reside in the same loss basin with no interpolation barrier. More generally, nonlinear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) relaxes the path constraint to allow curved trajectories, typically parameterized as B ´ezier curves or piecewise linear paths. This distinction has practical implications: linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) enables direct weight averaging, while nonlinear connectivity may require more sophisticated merging procedures. The analysis of loss barriers, the maximum loss increase encountered along interpolation paths, provides quantitative measures for characterizing mode connectivity strength. Singh et al. (2024) present a systematization of methods for computing and interpreting these barriers, noting that barrier height correlates inversely with merging success. Specifically, given solutions θ1 and θ2, the loss barrier is defined as: 

∆L = max  

> α∈[0,1 ]

L(θ(α)) − 12 (L(θ1) + L(θ2)) (1) When ∆L ≤ ϵ for some small threshold ϵ, we say the models exhibit ϵ-linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020). The relationship between loss barrier magnitude and merging success can be formally characterized through the following theorem: 

Proposition 1 (Merging Error Bound (Singh et al., 2024)) . Let θ1, θ2 be two models with shared pretrained initialization θ0, and let θavg = 12 (θ1 + θ2). Under L -smoothness of the loss function L,the performance degradation of the averaged model is bounded by: 

L(θavg ) − 12 (L(θ1) + L(θ2)) ≤ L

8 ∥θ1 − θ2∥2 (2) This bound reveals why shared initialization is critical: models fine-tuned from the same pretrained checkpoint exhibit smaller ∥θ1 − θ2∥, yielding tighter merging guarantees. A critical insight enabling practical model merging in the large language model era con-cerns the role of shared pretrained initialization. When multiple models are fine-tuned from a common pretrained checkpoint, they exhibit substantially stronger linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) compared to independently trained models (Frankle et al., 2020; Garipov et al., 2018). This phenomenon arises because fine-tuning typically induces relatively small parameter perturbations that remain within the same loss basin as the pretrained model, whereas training from random initialization explores fundamentally different regions of the loss landscape. Empirical investigations have employed various path parameterizations to probe connec-tivity structure. Quadratic B ´ezier curves, parameterized as θ(α) = ( 1 − α)2θ1 + 2α(1 −

α)θm + α2θ2 with learnable midpoint θm, can discover low-loss nonlinear paths even when linear barriers exist. Ren et al. (2025) demonstrated that trained networks frequently exhibit monotonic interpolation properties, where loss decreases steadily from one endpoint toward the other, suggesting asymmetric basin structures. The work of Nobari et al. (2025) revealed that apparent loss barriers often arise from feature distribution mismatches rather than genuine geometric separation, proposing activation renormalization to restore connectivity. This finding suggests that many observed failures 5Preprint. of linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) stem from correctable statistical artifacts rather than fundamental incompatibility between solutions. Understanding basin characteristics extends beyond barrier analysis to encompass basin width and shape. Lubana et al. (2023) demonstrated that interpolated models can exhibit performance dynamics reflecting the local basin geometry, with wider basins supporting more robust interpolation. These theoretical insights directly inform practical merging strategies by establishing that shared pretraining serves as a powerful mechanism for ensuring models occupy connected regions amenable to linear combination. However, even when models theoretically reside in connected basins, the success of direct weight averaging depends critically on how the models are represented, a consideration that leads naturally to examining the fundamental symmetries inherent in neural network weight spaces. 

2.3 Weight Space Symmetries and Permutation Invariance 

These fundamental symmetries, particularly permutation invariance, substantially impact the feasibility and methodology of model merging. Permutation invariance arises from that reordering hidden units within a layer, along with corresponding adjustments to incoming and outgoing weight matrices, produces a functionally equivalent network. This mathematical property implies that the number of distinct parameterizations encoding identical input-output mappings grows combinatorially with network depth and width, creating substantial challenges for direct weight space operations. Consider a feedforward network with weight matrices W(l) connecting layer l − 1 to layer l.For any permutation matrix P(l) applied to the hidden units of layer l, the transformation 

(W(l), W(l+1)) 7 → (P(l)W(l), W(l+1)(P(l))T ) preserves the network’s function exactly. For a network with L hidden layers each containing n units, this yields (n!)L equivalent parame-terizations, a symmetry group whose size renders the loss landscape highly non-convex despite potential functional simplicity. The comprehensive treatment in (Ainsworth et al., 2023) emphasizes that this symmetry significantly complicates the interpretation of dis-tances and interpolations in weight space, as two networks computing identical functions may appear arbitrarily distant under Euclidean metrics. The implications for model merging are immediate and severe. When averaging weights from two independently trained networks, the hidden unit orderings are essentially arbitrary and unrelated, causing the averaged network to combine misaligned features in semantically meaningless ways. Formally, if θA and θB represent two solutions related by permutation such that θB = π(θA) for some permutation π, then 12 (θA + θB) generally lies far from both solutions in functional space despite occupying their geometric midpoint. This observation explains why naive weight averaging of independently trained networks typically produces catastrophic performance degradation, even when both source networks achieve comparable accuracy. The theoretical framework connecting permutation alignment (Ainsworth et al., 2023) to optimal transport provides principled methods for resolving this challenge. Given two net-works with weight matrices WA and WB, finding the optimal permutation reduces to solving an assignment problem that minimizes some distance metric between aligned representa-tions. Ferbach et al. (2024) discuss how this formulation enables tractable algorithms based on the Hungarian method or approximate transport solvers, establishing correspondence between hidden units based on their functional roles rather than arbitrary indexing. The work of Nobari et al. (2025) demonstrated that even after permutation alignment, residual distribution mismatches in intermediate activations can create apparent barriers to interpolation. Their analysis revealed that permutation-aligned networks may still exhibit incompatible feature statistics, means and variances of hidden activations, that cause interpolated networks to produce out-of-distribution internal representations. This insight motivates post-alignment normalization procedures that reconcile activation distributions, further reducing barriers to successful merging. 6Preprint. Shared initialization provides a natural mechanism for symmetry breaking that circum-vents permutation ambiguity entirely. When multiple models are fine-tuned from identical pretrained weights, the optimization trajectories implicitly preserve hidden unit corre-spondence established during pretraining. This explains the empirical observation that fine-tuned models exhibit substantially better mergeability than independently trained counterparts (Wortsman et al., 2022a). The pretrained initialization effectively anchors each hidden unit to a specific functional role, ensuring that corresponding parameters across fine-tuned variants encode semantically related modifications. Recent systematic investigations have quantified the relationship between alignment quality and merging success, revealing that architectural choices and training procedures influence the degree to which permutation alignment is necessary. Transformer architectures with their structured attention mechanisms exhibit different symmetry properties than fully-connected networks. These insights regarding weight space symmetries, combined with the earlier discussions of loss landscape geometry and mode connectivity, collectively inform a unified understanding of the conditions necessary for successful model merging. 

2.4 Prerequisites and Conditions for Successful Model Merging 

This unified understanding can be formalized as a framework of mergeability conditions , the set of prerequisites that must be satisfied for model merging to yield high-quality results. Understanding these conditions is essential for practitioners seeking to predict whether a given set of models can be successfully combined and for researchers developing new merging algorithms with broader applicability. The most critical prerequisite for successful model merging is shared pretrained initialization, which establishes a common reference point in weight space from which all candidate models diverge during fine-tuning. Formally, consider a pretrained model with parameters 

θpre and a set of fine-tuned models {θ1, θ2, . . . , θK } each obtained by optimizing task-specific objectives starting from θpre . The shared initialization ensures that fine-tuned parameters remain within the same loss basin, enabling linear interpolation θα = ∑Kk=1 αkθk to traverse low-loss regions rather than crossing high-loss barriers (Garipov et al., 2018; Frankle et al., 2020). This basin-sharing property significantly distinguishes the fine-tuning paradigm from independent training, where models converge to disconnected minima separated by substantial energy barriers. Architectural compatibility is a second essential condition, requiring both structural identity and representational alignment. Models must share identical architectures—layer config-urations, activation functions, and normalization schemes—for element-wise parameter operations to be well-defined. Beyond this structural requirement, Li et al. (2023a) demon-strate that certain architectural choices exhibit inherently favorable merging properties. Transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017), with their residual connections and layer normalization, maintain more consistent feature representations across fine-tuning vari-ants, facilitating parameter combination without the severe interference observed in earlier network designs. The residual stream structure effectively constrains the magnitude of per-layer modifications, keeping fine-tuned models closer to the pretrained initialization. Training procedure similarity also strongly influences merging success. Models fine-tuned with similar hyperparameters (learning rate, batch size, optimizer) tend to follow compara-ble trajectories through weight space, yielding stronger linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020). Conversely, substantial procedural divergence can cause models to settle in distinct sub-basins within the broader pretrained basin, introducing interpolation barriers that degrade merge quality. Izmailov et al. (2018) provide empirical analysis showing how training duration and learning rate magnitude influence the distance between fine-tuned solutions and consequently the loss barrier encountered during interpolation. The theoretical framework for predicting capability preservation during merging remains incomplete but can be partially characterized through the lens of task vector interference. When fine-tuning induces parameter modifications in complementary subspaces, differ-ent parameters or opposing directions for different tasks, merging preserves individual capabilities through linear superposition. However, when task-specific adaptations overlap 7Preprint. substantially and conflict in direction, the merged model exhibits degraded performance on all constituent tasks. Nobari et al. (2025) demonstrate that even when parameter-level conflicts are resolved, activation distribution mismatches can cause capability degrada-tion, highlighting the multi-faceted nature of mergeability assessment. This observation motivates the development of mergeability prediction methods that analyze both parameter-space and representation-space compatibility, enabling principled decisions about which models can be successfully combined. Yet while these conditions provide practical guidance, the theoretical foundations underlying them, particularly for large-scale language models, remain incompletely understood. 

2.5 Open Theoretical Questions and Research Frontiers 

Despite this progress, several substantial gaps persist between observed phenomena and rigorous theoretical explanations, presenting fertile ground for future research. The most pressing open question concerns the fundamental mechanisms by which pretrained large language models exhibit such strong linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) follow-ing independent fine-tuning on disparate tasks. While it is well-established that shared initialization creates a common loss basin, the theoretical understanding of why this basin remains sufficiently broad and convex to accommodate diverse task-specific adaptations, particularly as model scale increases to billions of parameters, remains incomplete. (Singh et al., 2024) identifies this explanatory gap as a central challenge, noting that existing mode connectivity theory was largely developed in smaller neural networks and may require substantial extension to account for the unique properties of large-scale language models. The relationship between model scale and mergeability properties presents another the-oretically unresolved frontier. Empirical observations suggest that larger models exhibit more favorable merging characteristics, with reduced loss barriers and improved capability retention compared to smaller counterparts. However, a principled mathematical frame-work explaining this phenomenon remains elusive. One hypothesis posits that increased overparameterization expands the effective dimensionality of the loss basin, providing more ”room” for task-specific adaptations to coexist without interference. An alternative perspec-tive suggests that the emergent representations in larger models may be more compositional and modular, naturally supporting the superposition of task-specific modifications. Recent work provides empirical investigation into scale effects but acknowledges that theoretical explanations for observed scaling behaviors remain speculative. Emerging research directions seek to develop predictive frameworks for merge compati-bility that could obviate the need for exhaustive experimentation. The challenge can be formalized as learning a function C : (θ1, θ2, . . . , θk) → [0, 1 ] that estimates the expected per-formance of merging models θ1, . . . , θk without actually performing the merge. Promising approaches analyze task vector statistics, including angular relationships and magnitude distributions, to predict interference severity. surveys existing techniques for characterizing solution relationships through loss landscape analysis, providing foundational tools that could support compatibility prediction. However, translating these geometric insights into reliable predictive models requires addressing the computational challenge of efficiently approximating high-dimensional loss surface properties. Theoretical investigations into the fundamental limits of merging constitute another critical research frontier. While sparsification-based methods such as TIES-Merging and DARE have demonstrated that parameter interference can be mitigated, the question of when interference becomes irreconcilable, representing a fundamental rather than technical limi-tation, remains open. Nobari et al. (2025) demonstrate that activation-level statistics provide complementary information to parameter-level analysis, suggesting that comprehensive mergeability theory must account for both weight space and representation space phe-nomena. Furthermore, the conditions under which nonlinear interpolation paths offer strictly superior outcomes compared to linear combinations, and how such paths might be efficiently discovered, represent underexplored theoretical territories with significant practical implications. 8Preprint. Table 2: Comparison of theoretical foundations and concepts in model merging.                      

> Theoretical Concept Key Approach Key Feature(s) Limitations/Notes Year Loss Landscape Geometry Analyzes geometric properties of high-dimensional parameter space Explains why weight interpola-tion yields functional networks Complex landscapes make com-plete characterization difficult 2024
> Linear Mode Connectivity
> (Garipov et al., 2018) Identifies low-loss paths be-tween trained solutions in weight space Central to explaining success of weight interpolation methods Requires shared initialization for strong connectivity 2024
> Permutation Invariance
> (Ainsworth et al., 2023) Exploits symmetry from reorder-ing hidden units with weight ad-justments Multiple equivalent parameteri-zations for same function Alignment required before merg-ing independently trained mod-els 2024
> Weight Space Symmetries
> (Ainsworth et al., 2023) Analyzes fundamental symme-try properties affecting merging feasibility Enables functionally equivalent network representations Symmetry breaking needed for meaningful comparisons 2024
> Mergeability Conditions
> (Singh et al., 2024) Establishes unified framework of prerequisites for successful merg-ing Predictive criteria for merge quality assessment Conditions may vary across model architectures and tasks 2024
> Shared Initialization Theory
> (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) Explains role of common pre-trained weights in enabling merging Strong predictor of linear mode connectivity Theoretical mechanisms not fully understood for LLMs 2024
> Convexity Analysis Examines local and global con-vexity properties of loss surfaces Convex regions enable reliable weight averaging Neural networks generally non-convex globally 2024

Finally, extending merging theory to accommodate architectural heterogeneity presents significant theoretical challenges. Current frameworks assume exact architectural corre-spondence, but practical scenarios increasingly involve models with variations in layer counts, hidden dimensions, or attention mechanisms. Developing principled theoretical foundations for cross-architecture merging, potentially leveraging representation alignment or functional correspondence rather than direct parameter mapping, could substantially expand the applicability of model merging techniques while requiring novel mathematical frameworks that transcend current weight-space formulations. The theoretical foundations examined in this section, encompassing loss landscape geometry, linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020), and weight space symmetries, collectively establish the mathematical conditions under which model merging can succeed (summa-rized in Table 2), while also highlighting the fundamental barriers that arise when models reside in disconnected basins or exhibit misaligned permutation symmetries. These insights provide essential guidance for understanding when simple averaging will preserve model capabilities and when more sophisticated interventions become necessary. With this theoret-ical groundwork established, the following section turns to practical weight-space averaging and geometric interpolation methods, which translate these foundational principles into the algorithmic methods that instantiate these principles. 

## 3 Weight-Space Averaging and Geometric Interpolation Methods 

This section examines weight-space averaging and geometric interpolation—the most funda-mental class of merging techniques that operate directly on model parameters. We organize these approaches along a spectrum of geometric sophistication: static averaging with fixed coefficients, trajectory-based methods that exploit optimization dynamics, and geometric interpolation (e.g., SLERP) that respects the manifold structure of weight spaces. 

3.1 Linear Averaging and Static Model Soups 

Weight averaging represents the most fundamental instantiation of model merging. It computes the element-wise arithmetic mean of model parameters, treating weight space as a Euclidean vector space. This formula admits a natural generalization to weighted averaging 

θavg = ∑i αiθi with ∑i αi = 1, where the coefficients αi can be tuned on a held-out set or determined via importance metrics such as Fisher information (Matena & Raffel, 2022). Given a collection of N models with parameters {θ1, θ2, . . . , θN }, uniform weight averaging produces a merged model with parameters: 9Preprint. 

θmerged = 1

N

> N

# ∑

> i=1

θi

This formulation assumes all source models share identical architectures with correspond-ingly positioned parameters. This works because of linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020): models fine-tuned from a common pretrained initialization tend to reside within the same loss basin, enabling linear interpolation between solutions without traversing high-loss regions. Singh & Jaggi (2020) demonstrated that neural networks sharing early training trajectories exhibit this connectivity property, while (Izmailov et al., 2018) provided theoretical analysis connecting proximity to initialization with favorable generalization behavior. Importantly, this connectivity assumption breaks down when models originate from independent random initializations or when fine-tuning procedures cause parameters to diverge substantially from the shared pretrained manifold, resulting in interpolation paths that traverse high-loss barriers (Singh et al., 2024). The Model Soups framework, introduced by Wortsman et al. (2022a), represents a principled advancement in weight-space averaging by systematically studying the aggregation of multiple fine-tuned checkpoints. The framework establishes two primary aggregation strategies: the uniform soup and the greedy soup (Jang et al., 2024). The uniform soup computes the arithmetic mean of all N available model checkpoints without selection: 

θuniform = 1

N

> N

# ∑

> i=1

θi

This baseline approach assumes all fine-tuned models contribute constructively to the aggre-gate solution. While computationally straightforward, the uniform soup may incorporate checkpoints whose parameter contributions introduce interference that degrades overall performance. The greedy soup addresses this limitation through iterative conditional selection, incorpo-rating models into the aggregate only when their inclusion improves held-out validation performance. Formally, starting with an initial model θsoup = θ1, each candidate θi is added only if: 

L

 k · θsoup + θi

k + 1



< L(θsoup )

where k denotes the current number of models in the soup and L represents the validation loss function. Empirically, Model Soups demonstrated substantial improvements across multiple bench-marks. While initially validated on vision models, this approach has since been applied to large language models. The key advantage is enhanced robustness to distribution shift. These improvements (Wortsman et al., 2022b) incur no additional inference cost compared to deploying a single model, as the merged architecture maintains identical computational requirements during deployment. This selective aggregation strategy addresses a fundamental limitation of uniform averaging: not all models contribute equally to the merged solution, and certain checkpoints may introduce parameter interference that degrades performance. Wortsman et al. (2022a) demonstrate that weight-space operations can enable constructive task composition when models are appropriately combined, while unstructured aggregation frequently results in destructive interference patterns. Model Ratatouille (Ram’e et al., 2023a) extends this insight by demonstrating that recycling diverse auxiliary models fine-tuned on various domains improves out-of-distribution generalization, providing a principled approach for leveraging the growing ecosystem of available fine-tuned models. The relationship between 10 Preprint. model aggregation and federated learning has been explored extensively, with Li et al. (2023a) examining how weighted averaging strategies can be adapted to scenarios involving heterogeneous client contributions (Li et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020) and non-identically distributed data. Unlike exhaustive combinatorial search over model subsets, which becomes computa-tionally prohibitive as the candidate pool grows exponentially, greedy selection provides an efficient approximation that scales linearly with the number of available checkpoints. However, this approach assumes that validation performance serves as a reliable proxy for generalization, an assumption that may not hold under significant distribution shift between validation and deployment domains. Furthermore, theoretical analyses indicate that linear averaging methods, while computationally efficient, do not account for the permutation symmetries inherent in neural network weight spaces, motivating the develop-ment of alignment-based interpolation techniques discussed in later subsections. Beyond these structural considerations, the uniform weighting scheme inherent in these approaches raises a more fundamental question: whether treating all parameters as equally important accurately reflects their heterogeneous contributions to model functionality. 

3.2 Importance-Weighted Averaging and Fisher Information 

Importance-weighted averaging methods directly address this question by rejecting the implicit assumption that all parameters contribute equally to model functionality, an as-sumption that significantly misrepresents the heterogeneous nature of neural network weight spaces. In practice, certain parameters encode critical task-specific information while others remain largely unchanged from pretraining or exhibit high variance across fine-tuning runs. By incorporating second-order information about parameter sensitivity, these methods enable more principled aggregation that prioritizes high-information parameters while attenuating noise from less consequential weights. The theoretical foundation for importance-weighted merging derives from the Fisher Infor-mation Matrix (FIM), which characterizes the local curvature of the loss landscape regarding model parameters. For a model with parameters θ and loss function L, the Fisher Informa-tion Matrix is defined as F = E[∇θ log p(x|θ)∇θ log p(x|θ)⊤], where the expectation is taken over the data distribution. Parameters associated with high Fisher information values corre-spond to directions in weight space where small perturbations significantly affect model predictions, indicating their importance for task performance. Fisher-weighted averaging exploits this insight by computing the merged parameters as θmerged = ( ∑i Fi)−1 ∑i Fiθi,where Fi denotes the Fisher Information Matrix computed for model i. This formulation effectively weights each model’s contribution inversely proportional to its uncertainty, yielding a maximum a posteriori estimate under Gaussian assumptions about parameter distributions. The computational demands of full Fisher Information Matrix estimation render it in-tractable for contemporary large language models with billions of parameters. Practical implementations therefore employ diagonal approximations, where only the diagonal en-tries Fi,jj are retained, reducing both memory requirements and computational complexity from O(d2) to O(d) where d represents the parameter count. This diagonal Fisher-weighted averaging computes element-wise weighted means: θmerged, j = ( ∑i Fi,jj θi,j)/(∑i Fi,jj ), treat-ing each parameter independently. While this approximation discards correlation structure between parameters, empirical investigations demonstrate that diagonal Fisher weighting substantially outperforms uniform averaging across diverse task combinations (Matena & Raffel, 2022). Alternative formulations leverage covariance statistics rather than Fisher information to estimate parameter importance. The RegMean approach (Jin et al., 2023) computes inner products between model activations (Matena & Raffel, 2022) to construct weight matrices that account for the representational structure learned by each model. Specifically, Reg-Mean solves a linear regression problem that minimizes the expected squared difference between the merged model’s outputs and those of the constituent models, weighted by activation covariances. This representation-aware weighting implicitly captures parameter 11 Preprint. dependencies that diagonal Fisher approximations neglect, potentially yielding superior merging outcomes when models have learned complementary feature representations. WiSE-FT (Wortsman et al., 2022b) demonstrates that robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models can be achieved through simple weight interpolation between the pretrained and fine-tuned parameters, providing a principled approach for preserving zero-shot capabilities while acquiring task-specific expertise. Bayesian perspectives on weighted aggregation naturally extend these importance-based schemes, treating merged parameters as posterior estimates given observations from multiple training procedures. Recent work has also explored the relationship between model merging and continual learning (He et al., 2024; Jordan et al., 2022), with Stoica et al. (2023) proposing ZipIt! for merging models trained on dis-joint tasks by exploiting feature correlations, and Tang et al. (2024a) providing systematic benchmarking of merging methods under controlled conditions. The relationship between model merging and catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016) presents another critical consideration. When fine-tuned models are merged, the resulting model must retain capabilities from all constituent tasks without catastrophically forgetting any individual specialization. Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) and related continual learning methods provide theoretical frameworks for understanding which parameters are most critical for specific capabilities, insights that directly inform importance-weighted merging strategies. Despite their theoretical appeal, importance-weighted methods introduce several practical challenges. Fisher information estimates require access to representative data samples from each constituent model’s training distribution, information that may be unavailable when merging pretrained models obtained from external sources. Furthermore, the ap-proximation quality of diagonal Fisher estimates degrades in highly overparameterized networks where off-diagonal correlations capture essential structural relationships (Matena & Raffel, 2022). Unlike uniform averaging, which requires only the model weights them-selves, importance-weighted approaches demand additional computational overhead for Fisher or covariance estimation, creating tradeoffs between merging quality and practical deployability that practitioners must navigate based on their specific resource constraints and accuracy requirements. Crucially, both uniform and importance-weighted averaging share a common assumption: they operate on models trained independently, treating the aggregation problem as combining discrete endpoints without exploiting any structure from the optimization process itself. 

Limitations and failure modes. Despite its simplicity and empirical success, linear aver-aging exhibits well-characterized failure modes. When source models are fine-tuned with substantially different learning rates or regularization strengths, the resulting parameter vectors may reside in distinct loss basins, causing their average to land on a high-loss bar-rier (Frankle et al., 2020). Performance also degrades when the number of merged models grows large and the tasks are semantically diverse, a phenomenon termed task interference .Ram ´e et al. (Ram’e et al., 2023a) partially address this by recycling intermediate fine-tuned checkpoints from diverse auxiliary tasks ( Model Ratatouille ), demonstrating that averaging models exposed to a broader training distribution yields more robust merged solutions. Nevertheless, characterizing the precise conditions under which linear averaging provably succeeds remains an open theoretical challenge (see Section 2). 

3.3 Trajectory-Based Averaging and Optimization Dynamics 

Trajectory-based averaging represents a significantly distinct paradigm that directly exploits the temporal structure of optimization, precisely the information that endpoint-focused methods discard. Rather than combining final checkpoints of separate training procedures, these techniques aggregate intermediate states collected along the optimization trajectory, leveraging the insight that weight-space averages of sequential iterates can approximate solutions residing near the center of flat loss basins. This geometric centering yields models exhibiting enhanced robustness to distribution shifts and improved generalization charac-teristics. 12 Preprint. 

Polyak Averaging. The theoretical foundations for trajectory-based averaging trace to Polyak and Juditsky’s seminal work on iterate averaging for stochastic approximation. Their analysis established that averaging SGD iterates achieves optimal asymptotic convergence rates, with the averaged solution ¯θn = 1 

> n

∑ni=1 θi converging at rate O(1 /n) compared to 

O(1 /√n) for the final iterate alone. This classical result provides the theoretical underpin-ning for modern trajectory averaging methods, demonstrating that temporal averaging serves as an implicit regularizer that suppresses gradient noise while preserving conver-gence to stationary points. 

Stochastic Weight Averaging. Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA) adapts iterate averaging to modern deep learning by averaging checkpoints collected during the latter stages of train-ing with cyclic or high constant learning rates (Izmailov et al., 2018). Formally, given check-points θ1, θ2, . . . , θn collected after initial convergence, SWA computes θSWA = 1 

> n

∑ni=1 θi.The key insight is that SGD with appropriately tuned learning rates explores a connected region corresponding to a single basin of attraction, and averaging over this exploration identifies the basin’s centroid. In the context of LLMs, SWA has been successfully applied to smooth out the optimization trajectory during the final stages of pretraining or instruction tuning, leading to models with improved generation quality and reduced perplexity on held-out data. The flatness of these averaged solutions, measured via local entropy metrics, correlates strongly with improved generalization. 

SWAG and Uncertainty Quantification. Stochastic Weight Averaging Gaussian (SWAG) extends SWA to approximate Bayesian inference by additionally capturing the covariance structure of the optimization trajectory. Beyond computing the mean θSWA , SWAG maintains a low-rank approximation to the covariance matrix Σ ≈ 1 

> n−1

∑ni=1(θi − θSWA )( θi − θSWA )⊤,enabling posterior sampling for uncertainty estimation. This extension proves particularly valuable for calibrated predictions and out-of-distribution detection, achieving competitive performance with ensemble methods at substantially reduced computational cost. 

Lookahead Optimizer. The Lookahead optimizer provides a complementary perspective by integrating trajectory averaging directly into the optimization procedure rather than applying it post-hoc. Lookahead maintains slow weights ϕ updated every k steps toward the fast weights θ via ϕ ← ϕ + α(θ − ϕ), effectively performing online trajectory averaging. This approach reduces variance in gradient estimates and demonstrates improved stability across learning rate choices, often achieving faster convergence while maintaining or improving final performance. 

Exponential Moving Average. Exponential Moving Average (EMA) represents a continu-ously updated variant that maintains a shadow copy of parameters throughout training. At each iteration t, the EMA parameters are updated according to θ(t) 

> EMA

= αθ (t−1) 

> EMA

+ ( 1 − α)θ(t),where α controls the temporal smoothing strength. Unlike SWA’s uniform averaging, EMA implements exponentially-decaying weights prioritizing recent iterates while retaining memory of the entire trajectory. The selection of decay coefficient α varies systematically with model scale and training duration. For large language models, values close to 1 are typical, with larger models and longer training runs generally benefiting from stronger smoothing. 

Applications in LLM Training. Trajectory averaging has demonstrated substantial benefits in large-scale language model development. In neural machine translation and general LLM pretraining, checkpoint averaging of the final training checkpoints is commonly used (Iz-mailov et al., 2018). In the model merging context, averaging multiple checkpoints from the same fine-tuning run can improve generation quality and robustness on downstream NLP tasks (Wortsman et al., 2022a). The connection between trajectory-based averaging and broader model merging frame-works emerges when considering multiple training runs initialized from common starting points. When models share a pretrained initialization and undergo fine-tuning on related tasks, their optimization trajectories remain confined to overlapping basins of attraction, enabling checkpoints to be meaningfully averaged despite originating from nominally inde-pendent procedures. This perspective bridges trajectory-based methods with task vector 13 Preprint. approaches, as temporal averaging within a single fine-tuning run and spatial averaging across related runs both operate by centering solutions within shared loss basins, with combined approaches yielding additive benefits. Practical implementations of trajectory-based averaging require attention to checkpoint selection strategy and computational overhead. Regarding collection frequency, Izmailov et al. established that averaging every epoch during the final 25% of training provides near-optimal results, while more frequent collection yields diminishing returns (Izmailov et al., 2018). For memory efficiency, running average formulations avoid storing multiple checkpoints: SWA requires only two model copies (current and averaged), while EMA maintains constant memory overhead regardless of training duration. The robustness benefits to distribution shift have been validated in multiple studies, with SWA-averaged models exhibiting smaller performance degradation on domain-shifted evaluation sets compared to single checkpoints, attributed to the implicit regularization toward flatter minima. Despite their effectiveness, trajectory-based methods share a common characteristic with the importance-weighted approaches discussed earlier: they perform arithmetic averaging in weight space, implicitly treating the parameter manifold as Euclidean. This assumption, while reasonable for iterates within a single optimization trajectory that remain geomet-rically proximate, becomes increasingly problematic when averaging models that have diverged substantially during independent fine-tuning, a limitation that motivates geomet-ric interpolation techniques designed to preserve the statistical properties of constituent parameter sets. 

Limitations. Trajectory-based methods significantly require access to intermediate check-points from a single training run, making them inapplicable when only final model weights are available—the common scenario in open-weight model repositories. Furthermore, the memory overhead of storing T checkpoints ( T × | θ| parameters) can be prohibitive for billion-parameter models, though rank-1 covariance approximations such as those in SWAG partially mitigate this. 

3.4 Geometric Interpolation and Manifold-Aware Methods 

Since Euclidean assumptions become problematic for divergent models, geometric inter-polation techniques offer principled alternatives that account for the curved structure of parameter spaces. When combining two parameter vectors θA and θB via linear inter-polation θmerged = ( 1 − α)θA + αθ B, the resulting vector’s magnitude typically satisfies 

∥θmerged ∥ < (1 − α)∥θA∥ + α∥θB∥ unless the vectors are perfectly aligned, leading to sys-tematic magnitude shrinkage that can degrade model representations. This phenomenon proves particularly acute when merging models with substantially different weight configu-rations. Spherical Linear Interpolation (SLERP) addresses magnitude preservation by constraining the interpolation path to lie on the hypersphere connecting two points in weight space. For parameter vectors normalized to unit length, SLERP computes the interpolated point as: SLERP (θA, θB; α) = sin (( 1 − α)Ω)

sin (Ω) θA + sin (αΩ)

sin (Ω) θB

where Ω = arccos (θA · θB/∥θA∥∥ θB∥) represents the angular distance between the two vectors. This formulation ensures that the interpolated vector maintains constant magni-tude throughout the interpolation trajectory, traversing a geodesic arc rather than cutting through the interior of the sphere. Empirical investigations have demonstrated that SLERP-based merging preserves representational geometry more faithfully than linear averaging, particularly for attention weight matrices where directional information carries semantic significance. In practice, applying SLERP to neural network merging requires careful consideration of granularity. Layer-wise application, where SLERP operates independently on each layer’s 14 Preprint. Table 3: Comparison of weight-space averaging and geometric interpolation methods for model merging.       

> Method Key Approach Key Feature(s) Limitations/Notes Year Uniform Averaging
> (Model Soups)
> Element-wise arithmetic mean:
> θmerged

= 1                               

> N∑Ni=1θi
> Simple; no hyperparameters; treats weight space as Eu-clidean Assumes equal parameter importance; suboptimal when models diverge significantly 2022
> Fisher-Weighted Averaging Importance weighting via Fisher Information matrix Accounts for heterogeneous parameter importance; pre-serves critical task-specific weights Computationally expen-sive; requires data for Fisher estimation 2022
> Stochastic Weight Averaging
> (SWA) (Izmailov et al., 2018)
> Average checkpoints along optimization trajec-tory Exploits temporal structure; finds flatter minima; improves generalization Limited to single training run; requires checkpoint storage 2018
> SLERP Spherical linear interpola-tion on hypersphere Preserves weight vector mag-nitude; avoids norm shrinkage in linear interpolation Limited to pairwise merg-ing; requires careful normal-ization 2023
> Task Arithmetic
> (Ilharco et al., 2023)
> Compute and combine task vectors τ

= θft − θpre      

> Modular; supports task addi-tion, negation, and composi-tion Task interference; requires shared pretrained initializa-tion 2023
> TIES-Merging
> (Yadav et al., 2023)
> Trim redundant params, elect signs, merge disjoint sets Reduces parameter interfer-ence; resolves sign conflicts Hyperparameter sensitive (trim ratio); additional com-putation 2023
> Latent Space Merging
> (Li et al., 2023a)
> Interpolation in activa-tion/latent space rather than weights Bypasses weight space geom-etry issues; often outperforms weight averaging May require data access; in-creased inference complex-ity 2024
> Manifold-Aware Interpolation Geodesic paths on param-eter manifolds with per-mutation alignment Respects non-Euclidean geom-etry; handles mode connectiv-ity Computationally intensive; requires solving alignment problem 2023

parameter tensor, has emerged as the dominant approach, as global application across flattened parameter vectors fails to capture the hierarchical structure of deep networks. observed that layer-wise (Yang et al., 2024c) SLERP achieves superior capability retention compared to uniform linear averaging when merging models fine-tuned on semantically distant tasks, attributing this advantage to the preservation of layer-specific activation statistics. Beyond spherical interpolation, manifold-aware methods encompass techniques that ex-plicitly model the non-Euclidean structure of parameter spaces. Latent space interpolation approaches, as explored in (Li et al., 2023a), project weight configurations into lower-dimensional manifolds where interpolation can be performed with reduced interference before mapping back to the original parameter space. This paradigm acknowledges that the effective dimensionality of viable weight configurations is substantially lower than the ambient parameter count, enabling interpolation paths that remain within the manifold of high-performing solutions. The variance preservation problem presents additional challenges beyond magnitude shrink-age. When averaging independent parameter vectors, the variance of the resulting distri-bution decreases proportionally to the number of models merged, potentially collapsing learned features toward uninformative mean values. Rescaling strategies that adjust merged parameters to match the original variance statistics partially address this limitation, though they introduce hyperparameters governing the appropriate variance target. Recent work notes that geometric interpolation methods incorporating both magnitude and variance preservation consistently outperform naive averaging when source models exhibit low angular similarity, though the benefits diminish for models sharing high linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) where Euclidean assumptions remain approximately valid. While these geometric considerations inform how interpolation should proceed, an orthogonal question concerns what exactly should be interpolated, a perspective that motivates reconceptualizing fine-tuning through the lens of task vectors. Table 3 compares the weight-space averaging and geometric interpolation methods discussed above. The methods examined in this section demonstrate that weight-space averaging, whether through uniform linear combinations, Fisher-weighted importance schemes, trajectory-based accumulation along optimization paths, or geometry-aware interpolation on param-15 Preprint. eter manifolds, provides a powerful framework for combining multiple models without additional training, with performance gains stemming from the exploitation of loss land-scape connectivity and mode connectivity properties. While these approaches focus on holistically merging entire model checkpoints through various averaging strategies, the next section examines task vector arithmetic and sparsification-enhanced methods, which shift the perspective from combining full parameter sets to treating fine-tuning-induced weight differences as modular, composable units supporting addition, negation, and scaling for targeted multi-task composition. 

## 4 Task Vector Arithmetic and Sparsification-Enhanced Methods 

We now turn to a different paradigm: isolating and manipulating the task-specific knowl-edge encoded during fine-tuning. Task vector arithmetic, introduced by Ilharco et al. (2023), reconceptualizes model merging by treating the weight differences between fine-tuned models and their shared pre-trained ancestor as composable vectors that support algebraic operations such as addition, negation, and scaling. We also cover sparsification-enhanced variants such as TIES-Merging (Yadav et al., 2023) and DARE (Yu et al., 2023) that address parameter interference and sign conflicts. 

4.1 Task Vector Formulation and Conceptual Framework 

The task vector framework formalizes how fine-tuning encodes task-specific knowledge within neural network parameters. Ilharco et al. (2023) introduced this foundational frame-work by proposing that the knowledge acquired during fine-tuning can be isolated, ma-nipulated, and transferred through simple algebraic operations on model weights. This formulation enables model specialization becomes amenable to systematic composition and modification. Formally, given a pretrained model with parameters θpre and a model fine-tuned on task t

with resulting parameters θt, the task vector τt is defined as the element-wise difference: 

τt = θt − θpre (3) This definition captures the parametric displacement induced by fine-tuning, effectively encoding the directional shift in weight space that transforms a general-purpose foundation model into a task-specialized variant. Based on this formulation, Ilharco et al. (2023) defined three fundamental arithmetic operations that constitute a versatile toolkit for training-free model editing: 

Task Addition (Multi-task Fusion). To combine capabilities from multiple tasks, their respective task vectors can be added and applied to the pretrained model: 

θmulti = θpre +

> n

# ∑

> i=1

λiτi (4) where λi denotes the scaling coefficient for task i. This operation enables the creation of multi-task models without joint training, assuming the task vectors reside in approximately orthogonal subspaces. 

Task Negation (Forgetting/Unlearning). To remove an undesirable capability or behavior (e.g., toxicity) encoded in a task vector τ, the vector can be subtracted from the pretrained model: 

θforget = θpre − λτ (5) where λ > 0 controls the strength of the unlearning effect. This operation has found practical application in detoxification and bias removal for LLMs. 

Task Scaling (Capability Modulation). The strength of a specific capability can be continu-ously modulated by scaling its task vector: 

θscaled = θpre + ατ (6) 16 Preprint. where α controls the intensity of the specialized behavior ( α > 1 amplifies the capability, while 0 < α < 1 attenuates it). 

Task Analogy (Relationship Transfer). Extending the vector algebra metaphor, task analogy enables transferring the relationship between two tasks to a third domain. Given task vectors 

τA, τB, and a target task vector τC, the analogy operation applies the directional difference between two tasks to a third: 

θanalogy = θpre + τC + ( τB − τA) (7) This operation mirrors classical word analogy reasoning (e.g., “king − man + woman =

queen”) in embedding spaces, but operates directly on model parameters. As illustrated in Figure 3(d), task analogy enables compositional transfer of inter-task relationships without additional training. The conceptual elegance of this formulation lies in its interpretation: fine-tuning is recon-ceptualized not as an opaque optimization process but as the application of a structured transformation that can be decomposed, analyzed, and recombined with other such trans-formations. The task vector paradigm derives its power from treating these parameter deltas as first-class mathematical objects inhabiting a vector space (Ilharco et al., 2023). Under this interpretation, the weight space of neural networks admits linear algebraic operations that preserve semantic meaning. When a model is fine-tuned on a specific capability, whether instruction following, mathematical reasoning, or domain expertise, the resulting task vector encodes a compact representation of that capability that remains meaningful when extracted from its original context and applied to compatible base models. This formulation maintains deep connections to the theoretical foundations of mode con-nectivity discussed in earlier sections. The success of task vector arithmetic implicitly relies on the phenomenon of linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) between fine-tuned models sharing a common pretrained initialization (Garipov et al., 2018). When fine-tuned models reside within the same loss basin as their shared pretrained ancestor, the linear in-terpolation paths between them traverse regions of relatively low loss, enabling meaningful combination through arithmetic operations on their corresponding task vectors. The requirements for task vector compatibility impose important constraints on practical applications. As emphasized in (Li et al., 2023a), task vector operations are inherently limited to models with identical architectures since they rely on element-wise parameter correspondence. Both source models must derive from the same pretrained checkpoint, ensuring that their parameter spaces are aligned and that the extracted task vectors encode semantically coherent transformations. This architectural constraint reflects the fundamental observation that task vectors represent relative displacements within a shared reference frame established by the common initialization. The magnitude and distribution of task vector components carry meaningful information about the nature of fine-tuning adaptations. Ilharco et al. (2023) investigated how different fine-tuning procedures produce task vectors with distinct statistical properties, affecting downstream merging behavior. Empirical analyses reveal that task vectors exhibit consider-able sparsity, with relatively few parameters undergoing substantial modification during fine-tuning while the majority remain close to their pretrained values (Yu et al., 2023). This sparsity observation has motivated various enhancement strategies, though the immediate practical power of task vectors emerges from the fundamental algebraic operations they support, addition, negation, and scaling, which together constitute a versatile toolkit for training-free model editing. Similar to how knowledge distillation (Kim et al., 2023; Hinton et al., 2015) transfers knowledge between models through output matching, task vectors enable knowledge transfer through direct parameter manipulation. Figure 3 illustrates the three primary task vector operations. 

4.2 Basic Arithmetic Operations for Model Editing 

The three primary operations—addition, negation, and scaling—transform task vectors into versatile tools for training-free model editing. 17 Preprint. 

(a) Addition      

> τA
> τB
> +θmerged
> θpre +λ(τA+τB)

(b) Negation     

> θpre −τθclean
> θpre −λτ toxic

(c) Scaling        

> θpre λτ θmerged
> +
> θpre +λτ ,λ∈[0, 1 ]

(d) Analogy       

> τAτBθ′
> new
> −apply
> θnew + ( τB−τA)

Figure 3: Four fundamental task vector operations. (a) Addition combines multiple task vectors into a single model. (b) Negation subtracts a task vector to remove unwanted behavior. (c) Scaling controls task influence via λ. (d) Analogy transfers the relationship between two tasks. 

Task Vector Addition represents the most widely employed operation, enabling the combi-nation of multiple specialized capabilities into a unified model. Given a set of n task vectors 

{τ1, τ2, . . . , τn} extracted from models fine-tuned on distinct tasks, the merged model param-eters are computed as θmerged = θpre + ∑ni=1 λiτi, where λi denotes the scaling coefficient for task i. The seminal work Ilharco et al. (2023) demonstrated that this simple additive combination successfully transfers capabilities across diverse task categories, including instruction following, mathematical reasoning, and domain-specific knowledge (Xiao et al., 2023) adaptation in LLMs. The effectiveness of addition relies critically on the assumption that task-specific knowledge encoded in different task vectors occupies approximately or-thogonal subspaces of the parameter manifold, allowing superposition without destructive interference. (Li et al., 2023a) provides comprehensive empirical evidence that task addition achieves competitive performance across numerous NLP benchmarks when source tasks exhibit complementary rather than conflicting requirements. 

Task Vector Negation offers an effective capability for targeted behavior removal without requiring access to negative training examples or explicit unlearning procedures. By com-puting θedited = θpre − λτ unwanted , practitioners can attenuate or eliminate specific model behaviors such as toxic language generation, demographic biases, or domain-specific knowl-edge (Xiao et al., 2023) that should be restricted. Ilharco et al. (2023) originally demonstrated this capability by showing that negating task vectors extracted from models fine-tuned on toxic content datasets reduced harmful generation rates while preserving general lin-guistic competence. The mathematical intuition underlying negation follows from the interpretation of task vectors as directional displacements in capability space; reversing the direction of displacement moves the model away from the associated capability manifold. However, Ilharco et al. (2023) revealed important nuances regarding fairness implications, demonstrating that naive negation operations can inadvertently introduce new biases or disproportionately affect model behavior across different demographic groups. This finding underscores the need for careful analysis when employing negation for bias mitigation purposes. 

Scaling Coefficients provide fine-grained control over the magnitude of task contribu-tions, enabling balance competing objectives and prevent any single task from dominating the merged representation. The choice of scaling parameter λ presents a fundamental tradeoff: larger values increase task-specific performance but risk catastrophic interfer-ence with the pretrained model’s general capabilities, while smaller values preserve base model competence at the cost of diminished task specialization. Unlike Ilharco et al. (2023), which primarily explored uniform scaling across tasks, subsequent investigations have demonstrated the benefits of task-specific coefficient tuning. Tang et al. (2024c) showed that operating in the tangent space of neural network weights enables more principled coeffi-18 Preprint. cient selection by linearizing the relationship between scaling magnitude and performance outcomes. The analogy between task arithmetic and classical linear algebra operations provides both conceptual clarity and practical limitations. While vector addition in Euclidean space enjoys exact superposition properties, task vector addition operates in a highly nonlinear param-eter space where interactions between components can produce emergent behaviors not predicted by simple linear models (Li et al., 2023a). These nonlinear interactions manifest as parameter-level conflicts that can substantially degrade merged model performance, in-terference phenomena that demand systematic examination to enable principled mitigation strategies. 

4.3 Parameter Interference and Sign Conflict Analysis 

The parameter-level conflicts identified in the preceding discussion manifest through three distinct interference mechanisms that emerge when multiple task vectors are combined through element-wise operations. Systematic examination of these mechanisms is essential for developing principled mitigation strategies that preserve the compositional benefits of task arithmetic while minimizing performance degradation. 

Sign Conflicts represent perhaps the most pernicious form of parameter interference, occur-ring when task vectors from different fine-tuning objectives contain opposing directional updates for identical weight positions. Formally, for task vectors τ1, τ2, . . . , τn derived from n distinct fine-tuning procedures, a sign conflict at parameter position j occurs when 

∃i, k : sign (τ(j) 

> i

)̸ = sign (τ(j) 

> k

) and both |τ(j) 

> i

|, |τ(j) 

> k

| > ϵ for some threshold ϵ. When such conflicts arise, naive averaging produces parameter values that represent a compromised intermediate state, potentially satisfying neither task’s requirements. Yadav et al. (2023) provided comprehensive empirical analysis demonstrating that sign conflicts correlate strongly with performance degradation in merged models, with certain layer types exhibit-ing systematically higher conflict rates than others. The analysis suggests that attention projection matrices and feed-forward intermediate layers may accumulate more severe conflicts, indicating that these components encode task-specific information that resists direct composition. 

Magnitude Disparities constitute a second critical interference mechanism, arising from the heterogeneous scaling of parameter updates across different fine-tuning procedures. Even when sign agreement exists, substantial differences in update magnitudes, quantified as max i |τ(j) 

> i

|/ min k |τ(j) 

> k

| for non-trivial updates, can cause certain tasks to dominate the merged representation disproportionately. This phenomenon is particularly pronounced when combining models fine-tuned with different learning rates, dataset sizes, or training durations (Yadav et al., 2023). The resulting merged model exhibits biased behavior favoring tasks whose fine-tuning produced larger magnitude updates, effectively drowning out the contributions of more conservatively trained variants. Subsequent investigations by Li et al. (2023a) demonstrate that real-world task vectors exhibit heavy-tailed magnitude distributions with significant inter-task variance. 

Redundant Parameter Modifications introduce a subtler but equally important source of interference, wherein low-magnitude updates that do not encode meaningful task-specific knowledge accumulate noise during the merging process. These redundant parameters arise from optimization dynamics that produce non-zero gradients even for weights irrelevant to the target task, creating spurious modifications that dilute the signal-to-noise ratio of the merged representation. Yu et al. (2023) formalized this observation by analyzing the effective rank and information content of task vectors, finding that a substantial fraction of parameter updates contribute minimally to task performance while actively degrading merge quality through interference with truly informative modifications. The interaction between these interference mechanisms produces complex, often non-additive effects that resist simple analytical characterization. (Li et al., 2023a) introduced statistical frameworks for analyzing the joint distribution of task vector parameters, re-vealing that interference severity depends critically on the correlation structure between 19 Preprint. 

Algorithm 1 TIES-Merging: Trim, Elect Sign, and Merge 

Require: Task vectors {τ1, τ2, . . . , τn}, trim ratio k, pretrained weights θpre 

Ensure: Merged model parameters θmerged  

> 1:

// Step 1: Trim - Keep only top-k% parameters by magnitude  

> 2:

for i = 1 to n do  

> 3:

˜τi ← TopK (τi, k) {Zero out small-magnitude parameters } 

> 4:

end for  

> 5:

// Step 2: Elect Sign - Resolve sign conflicts via majority voting  

> 6:

for each parameter position j do  

> 7:

γj ← sign  ∑ni=1 ˜τi,j

 {Determine dominant sign } 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

// Step 3: Merge - Average parameters with elected signs  

> 10:

for each parameter position j do  

> 11:

Sj ← { i : sign ( ˜τi,j) = γj} {Select agreeing task vectors } 

> 12:

¯τj ← 1  

> |Sj|

∑i∈Sj ˜τi,j {Average aligned values } 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

θmerged ← θpre + ¯τ 

> 15:

return θmerged 

task vectors rather than their marginal statistics alone. Visualization techniques includ-ing parameter-wise conflict heatmaps and layer-wise interference scores have emerged as diagnostic tools for identifying problematic regions before merging. This comprehensive characterization of interference phenomena, spanning sign conflicts, magnitude disparities, and redundant modifications, directly motivates the sparsification-enhanced approaches that selectively retain informative parameters while eliminating conflict-inducing modifica-tions. 

4.4 Sparsification-Enhanced Merging Methods 

Sparsification-enhanced methods address these interference phenomena by exploiting re-dundancy in task vectors: strategic parameter elimination reduces conflicts while preserving task-critical information. These approaches transform dense task vectors into sparse repre-sentations with improved composability. The seminal Trim-Elect-Sign (TIES) mechanism introduced a three-stage pipeline that sys-tematically addresses each category of interference. Given task vectors {τi}ni=1 derived from n fine-tuned models, the trimming stage first eliminates parameters with magnitudes below a threshold λ, producing sparse vectors ˜τi where ˜τi,j = τi,j · 1. The election stage then resolves sign conflicts through majority voting, computing a consensus sign mask 

γj = sgn (∑i ˜τi,j) that determines the dominant direction for each parameter across all task vectors. Finally, the sign alignment stage retains only those parameter updates consistent with the elected sign, yielding conflict-free task vectors suitable for aggregation. Yadav et al. (2023) demonstrated that this mechanism achieves substantial performance improvements over naive task arithmetic, particularly when merging more than three task vectors where sign conflicts proliferate. Complementing the deterministic TIES approach, the DARE (Drop And REscale) frame-work (Yu et al., 2023) introduced probabilistic sparsification as an alternative conflict reso-lution strategy. Rather than employing magnitude-based pruning, DARE applies random dropout to task vector parameters with probability p, followed by rescaling of the retained parameters by factor 1 /(1 − p) to preserve the expected contribution. Mathematically, the sparsified task vector becomes ˆτi = 11−p · τi ⊙ mi where mi is a binary mask with 

mi,j ∼ Bernoulli (1 − p). This approach draws theoretical justification from the observation that fine-tuning induces primarily low-rank modifications to pretrained weights, similar to findings in network pruning research (Frankle & Carbin, 2019), implying substantial 20 Preprint. redundancy that can be exploited through random sampling without catastrophic informa-tion loss. Recent extensions such as DELLA-Merging (Deep et al., 2024) further refine this approach through magnitude-based sampling (Deep et al., 2024) strategies. The stochastic nature of DARE provides an implicit ensemble effect when multiple merging trials are conducted, though practical deployments typically employ a single sparsification pass. Building upon these foundational methods, importance-aware sparsification has been pro-posed that leverages second-order information to guide parameter retention decisions. Rather than treating all parameters equivalently during the trimming process, such meth-ods compute importance scores based on the Fisher information or gradient magnitude accumulated during fine-tuning, preferentially retaining parameters whose modification contributed most significantly to task adaptation. This approach addresses a key limita-tion of magnitude-based pruning, wherein parameters with small absolute values may nonetheless encode critical task-specific information. Subsequent work extended the sparsification paradigm by introducing conflict-awareness into the retention decision process. Unlike TIES, which considers sign conflicts only af-ter independent trimming of each task vector, conflict-aware methods jointly optimize sparsification masks across all source models to minimize expected interference while maxi-mizing information retention. These methods employ a balanced sparsification criterion that normalizes contribution magnitudes across tasks, preventing dominant task vectors from overwhelming weaker contributors during the merge. Further refinements have incorporated distributional statistics of task vector parameters into sparsification decisions. Recognizing that optimal trimming thresholds vary across layers and parameter groups, these methods adaptively calibrate sparsification intensity based on local magnitude distributions, achieving more precise conflict resolution than global threshold approaches. While these sparsification techniques have proven effective at mitigating interference, they nonetheless operate within the constraints of direct weight-space manipulation, motivating alternative formulations that reconsider the mathematical foundations of task vector composition itself. 

4.5 Advanced Task Vector Manipulation and Recent Extensions 

Motivated by these limitations of direct weight-space manipulation, recent methodological advances have extended the task arithmetic framework toward more principled mathemati-cal reformulations that address fundamental limitations of standard parameter arithmetic. A particularly influential direction involves reconceptualizing task vector operations within the tangent space of neural network parameters, motivated by the observation that stan-dard weight-space arithmetic implicitly assumes local linearity that may not hold for large parameter displacements. Research in this area introduced a linearized formulation that operates on task vectors projected into the tangent space centered at the pretrained model weights (Tang et al., 2024c). Given a pretrained model with parameters θ0 and a fine-tuned model θt, the standard task vector τt = θt − θ0 captures parameter displacements without accounting for the nonlinear relationship between weights and model behavior. The tangent space approach instead considers the linearized model flin (x; θ) = f (x; θ0) + ∇θ f (x; θ0)⊤(θ − θ0), which provides a first-order approximation of how parameter changes affect model outputs. Within this framework, task vector arithmetic operates on the linearized representations, yielding improved compositional properties when combining multiple task-specific adaptations. Empirically, tangent space task arithmetic demonstrates superior performance on model editing benchmarks, particularly for negation operations where the standard formulation often produces unstable results. The theoretical motivation underlying tangent space methods connects to the broader ques-tion of why task arithmetic succeeds despite the highly nonlinear nature of neural network loss landscapes. The linearization effectively constrains operations to a regime where the superposition principle approximately holds, addressing scenarios where direct weight interpolation violates the implicit linearity assumptions of standard task arithmetic. This reformulation proves especially valuable for combining task vectors with large magnitudes 21 Preprint. Table 4: Comparison of task vector arithmetic and sparsification-enhanced methods for model merging.                      

> Method Key Approach Key Feature(s) Limitations/Notes Year Task Arithmetic
> (Ilharco et al., 2023)
> Linear task vector combination Defines task vectors as weight differences; enables addition, negation, scaling operations Suffers from parameter interference and sign con-flicts 2023
> TIES-Merging
> (Yadav et al., 2023)
> Trim, Elect Sign, Merge Resolves sign conflicts via magnitude-based trimming and democratic sign election Requires hyperparameter tuning for sparsity thresh-old 2023
> DARE Drop and Rescale Randomly drops delta pa-rameters and rescales remain-ing ones to preserve expecta-tions Stochastic nature may in-troduce variance 2024
> CABS Conflict-Aware Bal-anced Sparsification Explicitly identifies and elim-inates conflicting parameters while maintaining balance Limited to identical archi-tectures 2024
> Tangent Space Methods Tangent Space Opera-tions Reformulates task arithmetic in tangent space for im-proved linearity assumptions Increased mathematical complexity 2024

or when source models have undergone extensive fine-tuning that displaces parameters significantly from the pretrained initialization. Complementary to these mathematical reformulations, adaptive rank-based approaches have emerged as powerful techniques for optimizing the representational structure of task vectors. Recent work proposed methods that adaptively determine optimal rank configu-rations for low-rank approximations of task vectors across different layers and modules. Unlike uniform rank reduction strategies, these approaches recognize that different net-work components encode task-specific information with varying degrees of redundancy, allocating representational capacity accordingly. The method formulates rank selection as an optimization problem that balances compression efficiency against information preserva-tion, leveraging singular value decomposition to identify the effective dimensionality of task-specific modifications. The integration of adaptive rank methods with existing sparsification techniques yields synergistic benefits. While sparsification operates by zeroing individual parameters, rank-based approaches restructure the entire task vector representation, capturing different aspects of redundancy in fine-tuned models. Table 4 summarizes these methods. This complementarity enables hybrid strategies that first reduce task vector rank to eliminate correlated modifications, then apply sparsification to address residual conflicts among the compressed representations. Li et al. (2023a) provided comprehensive empirical analysis demonstrating that such combined approaches consistently outperform either technique in isolation across diverse task combinations. From a practical implementation perspective, these advanced manipulation methods have been progressively incorporated into community toolkits that facilitate reproducible model merging experimentation. The modular architecture of modern merging frameworks en-ables researchers to compose tangent space projections, adaptive rank reduction, and conflict-aware sparsification into customized merging pipelines tailored to specific appli-cation requirements. This ecosystem integration significantly lowers barriers to adoption, allowing practitioners to leverage sophisticated mathematical formulations without imple-menting complex algorithms from scratch. Despite their increasing sophistication, however, all task vector manipulation techniques discussed thus far share a common assumption: that merging should ultimately produce a unified parameter set. An alternative paradigm instead preserves distinct expert components while enabling flexible, input-dependent utilization of specialized capabilities. Task vector arithmetic provides a powerful conceptual framework for model editing, en-abling intuitive operations such as knowledge addition and negation, while sparsification-enhanced methods like TIES-Merging and DARE address critical challenges of parameter interference and sign conflicts by selectively pruning redundant or conflicting parameters 22 Preprint. Table 5: Unified comparison of representative model merging methods. Data-Free : no training/calibration data required. Interference : explicit handling of parameter conflicts. 

Shared Init : requires common pretrained initialization. 

Method Category Data-Free Interference Handling Shared Init Scalability Year 

Weight-Space Averaging (Section 3) 

Simple Averaging Static ✓ ✗ ✓ High –

Model Soups 

> (Wortsman et al., 2022a)

Greedy selection ✓ ✗ ✓ High 2022 

Fisher Merging 

> (Matena & Raffel, 2022)

Importance-weighted ✗ Partial ✓ Medium 2022 

RegMean 

> (Jin et al., 2023)

Linear regression ✗ Partial ✓ Medium 2023 

SLERP Geometric ✓ ✗ ✓ High 2023 

Task Vector & Sparsification (Section 4) 

Task Arithmetic 

> (Ilharco et al., 2023)

Additive ✓ ✗ ✓ High 2023 

TIES-Merging 

> (Yadav et al., 2023)

Sign resolution ✓ ✓ ✓ High 2023 

DARE 

> (Yu et al., 2023)

Sparsification ✓ ✓ ✓ High 2023 

Model Breadcrumbs 

> (Yadav et al., 2024b)

Sparse masking ✓ ✓ ✓ High 2023 

DELLA 

> (Deep et al., 2024)

Magnitude sampling ✓ ✓ ✓ High 2024 

Model Stock 

> (Deep et al., 2024)

Geometric selection ✓ Implicit ✓ High 2024 

AdaMerging 

> (Yang et al., 2024d)

Adaptive coefficients ✗ ✓ ✓ Medium 2024 

Structured & Routing (Section 5) 

Git Re-Basin 

> (Ainsworth et al., 2023)

Permutation alignment ✗ N/A ✗ Low 2023 

ZipIt! 

> (Stoica et al., 2023)

Feature matching ✗ N/A ✗ Low 2023 

Branch-Train-Merge 

> (Li et al., 2022)

MoE routing ✗ N/A ✓ High 2022 

PHATGOOSE 

> (Muqeeth et al., 2024)

Learned routing ✗ N/A ✓ Medium 2024 

Evol. Merging 

> (Akiba et al., 2024)

Search-based ✗ Implicit ✓ Medium 2024 

LoRA (Hu et al., 2022)-Specific 

LoRAHub 

> (Huang et al., 2023a)

Bayesian composition ✗ Partial ✓ High 2023 

MoLE 

> (Wu et al., 2024)

Expert routing ✗ N/A ✓ High 2025 before aggregation. These approaches operate primarily at the individual parameter level, treating model weights as independent quantities to be manipulated through algebraic op-erations. While this section focused on parameter-space manipulations and sparsity-driven conflict resolution, the next section examines structured and information-guided merging approaches that move beyond element-wise operations to exploit architectural organization through Mixture-of-Experts (Shazeer et al., 2017) compositions, leverage activation statistics for principled merging decisions, and employ evolutionary search to automatically discover optimal merging configurations across the full design space. 

## 5 Structured and Information-Guided Merging Approaches 

While task vector arithmetic and sparsification techniques offer powerful tools for mitigating parameter interference, they primarily operate on static weight representations without considering the underlying model architecture or runtime behavior. We now turn to a complementary class of approaches that leverage structural priors and dynamic information to guide the merging process more effectively. This section examines three advanced paradigms: architecture-level composition methods that preserve modularity through Mixture-of-Experts style routing mechanisms, activation-informed techniques that exploit representation statistics for principled parameter alignment, and evolutionary or search-based meta-strategies that automatically discover optimal merging configurations across the design space. 23 Preprint. 

5.1 Mixture-of-Experts Style Merging and Expert Routing Strategies 

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) style merging preserves specialized capabilities by organizing distinct expert pathways, directly addressing destructive interference when combining divergent models (Li et al., 2022; Muqeeth et al., 2023). By maintaining separate parameter spaces for each expert and employing learned routing mechanisms, MoE-style merging achieves a principled balance between capability preservation and unified deployment. The Branch-Train-Merge (BTM) framework provides the conceptual foundation for scalable expert training within this paradigm (Li et al., 2022). In BTM, a shared pretrained LLM is first replicated into multiple branches, each subsequently fine-tuned independently on distinct data subsets or task distributions. The resulting specialized models are then integrated through routing mechanisms that direct inputs to appropriate experts based on learned criteria. Formally, given a set of K expert models {E1, E2, . . . , EK } derived from a common pretrained initialization, the merged output for an input x is computed as: 

y =

> K

# ∑

> i=1

gi(x) · Ei(x) (8) where gi(x) represents the routing weight assigned to expert i by a gating network G,typically computed via a softmax transformation over learned routing logits: 

gi(x) = exp (w⊤ 

> i

h(x)) 

∑Kj=1 exp (w⊤ 

> j

h(x)) (9) with h(x) denoting an intermediate hidden representation and {w1, . . . , wK } the learnable routing parameters. To promote computational efficiency (Coste et al., 2024), top-k sparse routing activates only a subset of experts per input: 

gtop-ki (x) = 

(gi(x) if i ∈ TopK ({gj(x)}Kj=1)

0 otherwise (10) enabling inference costs that scale as O(k/K) relative to the full ensemble. CALM (Composi-tion to Augment Language Models) (Bansal et al., 2024) shows that LLMs can be augmented through composition with specialized modules, enabling capability expansion without full model retraining. The WEMoE framework (Tang et al., 2024d) demonstrates how this weight-ensembling approach can effectively integrate multiple task-specific models into a unified MoE architecture, achieving superior multi-task performance compared to naive averaging strategies by constructing experts from merged weight differences rather than full model copies. Several prominent methods have emerged for constructing MoE systems from indepen-dently trained models. PHATGOOSE (Post-Hoc Adaptive Tokenwise Gating Over an Ocean of Specialized Exp.[truncated] addresses the challenge of routing over pre-existing fine-tuned models by learning lightweight gating parameters while keeping expert weights frozen. For each expert Ei, PHATGOOSE computes routing scores based on the dot product between a learned gate vector vi and the input representation: gi(x) = v⊤ 

> i

h(x), where gate vectors are optimized on each expert’s original training data to identify inputs the expert handles well. MoLE (Mixture of LoRA Experts) (Hu et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2024) takes a parameter-efficient approach by treating individual LoRA adapters as experts, composing the output as y = W0 x + ∑Ki=1 gi(x) · Bi Ai x, where W0 represents the frozen pretrained weights and Bi Ai denotes the low-rank decomposition of expert i. This LoRA-as-experts paradigm substantially reduces memory overhead since each expert contributes only the low-rank adapter parameters rather than full model weights. LoRAHub (Huang et al., 2023a) enables efficient cross-task generalization via dynamic LoRA composition, while LoRAMoE (Dou et al., 2023) extends this concept by using LoRA-based experts as plugins that preserve world knowledge during instru.[truncated] The design of routing mechanisms constitutes a critical component (Muqeeth et al., 2024) determining MoE effectiveness. Gating networks typically employ learned transformations 24 Preprint. that map input representations to probability distributions over experts. The softmax-based router represents the most common instantiation, computing routing weights as 

g(x) = softmax (Wg · h(x)) , where h(x) denotes an intermediate representation and Wg

represents learnable gating parameters. To promote computational efficiency through sparse activation, top-k routing selects only a subset of experts for each input: gi(x) = 

softmax (TopK (Wg · h(x))) i, enabling inference costs that scale sublinearly with expert count. Load balancing mechanisms prevent expert collapse, where routing degenerates to selecting only a few experts. The auxiliary load balancing loss Lbalance = α · K · ∑Ki=1 fi · pi penalizes uneven expert utilization, where fi represents the fraction of tokens routed to expert i

and pi denotes the average routing probability for expert i across the batch (Jiang et al., 2024; Fedus et al., 2022). Switch Transformers (Fedus et al., 2022) demonstrated scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity mechanisms. Branch-Train-MiX (Sukhbaatar et al., 2024) provides a framework for mixing expert LLMs into a unified MoE architecture through branched training procedures. Alternative routing strategies beyond learned softmax gating include expert-choice routing (Jiang et al., 2024), which inverts the selection process by having experts select their top-k preferred tokens rather than tokens selecting experts, naturally achieving load balance. The granularity of routing decisions, whether at token-level for fine-grained adaptation or sequence-level for reduced overhead, depends substantially on expert specialization patterns and input diversity (Yadav et al., 2024a). Post-hoc integration of specialized fine-tuned models as experts presents unique challenges distinct from training MoE systems from scratch, as experts were never optimized for selec-tive activation. PHATGOOSE addresses this through a two-stage process: first computing per-expert gate vectors by optimizing routing scores on each expert’s training data inde-pendently, then combining these gates for joint inference without requiring access to all training data simultaneously. Model Kinship (Hu et al., 2024) provides a framework for ex-ploring and quantifying the relationships between models that influence merging outcomes. Arrow (Yadav et al., 2024a) formulates expert selection as multi-objective optimization, learning to compose subsets of LoRA experts based on task characteristics. ZipIt (Stoica et al., 2023) demonstrates that models trained on different tasks can be merged without addi-tional training through feature matching (Stoica et al., 2023) and permutation alignment. For scenarios where expert training data is unavailable, representation-based heuristics estimate input-expert compatibility through embedding similarity (Hu et al., 2024). Model-Based Experts (Yadav et al., 2024a) further improve efficiency by training small auxiliary classifiers to predict which experts will produce outputs most similar to the full ensemble, enabling dynamic expert pruning at inference time. MoE-style merging incurs distinct resource tradeoffs compared to parameter-averaging approaches. While parameter averaging produces a single model with memory require-ments identical to any constituent, MoE architectures must store all K expert parameter sets, resulting in memory scaling of O(K · | E|) where |E| denotes expert size, though LoRA-based experts substantially mitigate this overhead (Hu et al., 2022). Computationally, sparse top-k

routing reduces inference FLOPs to approximately k/K of the dense ensemble cost, but intro-duces routing computation overhead and memory bandwidth costs from loading selected expert weights. In contrast, merged models via techniques such as TIES-Merging (Yadav et al., 2023) or DARE (Yu et al., 2023) incur no additional inference cost beyond a single model but cannot dynamically adapt computation to input characteristics. The choice between paradigms thus depends on deployment constraints: MoE architectures favor scenarios requiring preserved specialist capabilities and sufficient memory, while parameter averaging suits resource-constrained settings where moderate capability blending suffices. Table 6 compares representative MoE-style and LoRA-based composition methods. Beyond these structural approaches to combining models, an orthogonal direction leverages empirical observations of how models process inputs to guide the merging process itself. 

Limitations of MoE-style merging. Despite the architectural elegance, MoE-style merging introduces several practical challenges. The memory footprint scales linearly with the number of experts, as each expert retains a full parameter copy (or full LoRA adapter), making deployment of K-expert systems K-times more expensive than a single merged 25 Preprint. Table 6: Comparison of MoE-style and LoRA-based composition methods for model merg-ing. Memory overhead is relative to base model size.                                                 

> Method Expert Type Memory Router Training Year Key Innovation
> Full-Model Expert Methods
> Switch Transformers
> (Fedus et al., 2022)
> Dense FFN K×FFN From scratch 2022 Simplified MoE with sin-gle expert routing
> Branch-Train-MiX
> (Sukhbaatar et al., 2024)
> Full model K×Post-hoc 2024 Branched training for ex-pert specialization
> PHATGOOSE
> (Muqeeth et al., 2024)
> Full model K×Per-expert 2024 Post-hoc gating without joint training
> LoRA-Based Expert Methods
> LoRAHub
> (Huang et al., 2023a)
> LoRA adapter K×LoRA Few-shot 2023 Dynamic composition via gradient-free search
> MoLE LoRA adapter K×LoRA Learned gating 2025 Mixture-of-LoRA-Experts routing
> LoRAMoE
> (Dou et al., 2023)
> LoRA adapter K×LoRA Balanced routing 2023 Preserves world knowl-edge via localized balanc-ing
> Hybrid and Advanced Methods
> WEMoE
> (Tang et al., 2024d)
> Weight diff K×delta Task-aware 2024 Weight-ensembling from task vectors
> Twin-Merging
> (Lu et al., 2024)
> Modular Dynamic Adaptive 2024 Dynamic integration of modular expertise
> CALM
> (Bansal et al., 2024)
> Cross-attn Anchor + Aug Composed 2024 LLM augmentation through composition

model. Router training requires representative held-out data for each task, and poorly calibrated routers may exhibit expert collapse —routing all inputs to a single dominant expert—particularly when task distributions are imbalanced. Li et al. (2022) showed in the Branch-Train-Merge framework that domain classifier accuracy directly bounds the quality of the merged output, establishing a tight coupling between routing quality and downstream performance. Federated variants further exacerbate these issues: heterogeneous client data distributions can cause routers to overfit local patterns (Li et al., 2020). 

5.2 Activation-Informed and Representation-Guided Merging Methods 

Activation-informed and representation-guided merging methods embody this empirical approach, representing a significant departure from static weight-averaging by incorpo-rating direct observations of model behavior into the merging process. While methods such as Fisher-weighted averaging utilize second-order gradient information computed at parameter positions, activation-based approaches instead examine how models actually process inputs through their forward computational pathways, thereby capturing functional importance that may not be evident from gradient-based measures alone. The fundamental insight motivating these approaches is that parameter importance for a given task manifests directly in activation patterns during inference. When a model processes task-relevant inputs, certain neurons and attention heads exhibit consistently high activation magnitudes or frequencies, indicating their centrality to the computational process. Conversely, components with sparse or negligible activations contribute minimally to output formation and thus warrant reduced influence during merging. Formally, given a calibration dataset D representative of target tasks, activation-informed methods compute importance scores αi for parameter groups by aggregating statistics over forward passes: 

αi = f ({ai(x) : x ∈ D} ), where ai(x) denotes the activation vector associated with parame-ter group i when processing input x, and f is an aggregation function such as mean absolute activation or activation variance. Representation-level alignment extends beyond scalar importance scores to address the geometric structure of intermediate representations across models. Given two models θA

and θB fine-tuned from a common pretrained initialization, their intermediate represen-tations may occupy differently oriented subspaces despite encoding semantically similar information. Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) and related similarity metrics enable quan-tification of representational correspondence across layers, providing guidance for matching 26 Preprint. functionally equivalent components before parameter combination. This alignment proves particularly valuable when models have undergone divergent fine-tuning trajectories that disrupt the implicit correspondence established by shared initialization. Semantic-guided merging approaches leverage the rich structure of intermediate represen-tations to inform merging decisions at a finer granularity than global importance scores permit. Recent work on multimodal (Lin et al., 2024) large language model (MLLM) merg-ing, as noted in Yang et al. (2024b), demonstrates that semantic information extracted from multimodal representations can guide selective parameter combination in ways that pre-serve cross-modal alignment. These methods typically construct auxiliary objectives that encourage merged representations to maintain task-relevant semantic properties observed in constituent models, effectively treating representation preservation as a soft constraint during the merging optimization. Yang et al. (2024b) provide a taxonomy of activation-informed techniques, categorizing them by information source—from lightweight activation magnitudes to sophisticated attention pattern analysis. These methods achieve their advantages through task-relevant calibration data, raising questions about data requirements and calibration set composition. The computational overhead of activation-informed merging varies substantially across methods. Simple activation magnitude averaging requires only forward passes through calibration data, adding modest preprocessing cost. However, more sophisticated represen-tation alignment techniques may require solving optimization problems over representation matching objectives, substantially increasing computational requirements. Nobari et al. (2025) observe that model merging serves as a transformative method driving substantial advancements when appropriately guided by task-specific information, though the optimal tradeoff between computational investment and merging quality improvement remains context-dependent. Empirical evidence suggests activation-informed methods demonstrate greatest advantages when merging models with heterogeneous fine-tuning histories or when constituent mod-els exhibit substantial parameter interference under naive averaging. In scenarios where linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) holds strongly, typically when models share recent fine-tuning from identical pretrained checkpoints, the marginal benefit of activation guidance diminishes relative to simpler static methods. This aligns with the understanding that shared initialization establishes common loss basins within which parameter averaging succeeds without explicit importance weighting. Consequently, practitioners should con-sider activation-informed approaches primarily when merging distantly related models or when calibration data clearly reveals differential parameter utilization across tasks. Yet even with principled importance weighting, the broader challenge remains: given a collection of candidate models, how should one select which models to merge, determine layer-wise mixing coefficients, and configure method-specific hyperparameters? This combinatorial complexity motivates automated optimization strategies that can systematically explore the space of possible merge configurations. 

5.3 Evolutionary and Search-Based Optimization for Merging Configurations 

Since principled importance weighting alone cannot resolve the broader challenge of con-figuration selection, evolutionary and search-based approaches reformulate merging as an optimization problem over a structured configuration space. These methods enable principled exploration of merge recipes that would be infeasible to discover through ex-haustive enumeration or expert intuition alone. Akiba et al. (2019) provide hyperparameter optimi.[truncated] for model merging can be formally characterized as a product of discrete and continuous decision variables. Let M = {M1, . . . , MK } denote a collection of candidate source models. A merge recipe θ typically consists of a selected model subset S ⊆ M ,per-layer mixing coefficients α(l) ∈ ∆|S|− 1 (where l ranges from 1 to 32 or more, depending on model depth), and topological decisions regarding layer permutation or repetition. The optimization objective is defined as θ∗ = arg max θ F (Merge (θ)) , where F represents a fitness function derived from specific validation metrics. In practice, F is often a compos-ite score from the Open LLM Leaderboard or task-specific benchmarks such as GSM8K 27 Preprint. for reasoning and HumanEval for coding. This formulation reveals the immense scale of the challenge: a merge of two 70-billion parameter models involves optimizing hundreds of continuous coefficients alongside discrete architectural choices, creating a non-convex landscape rife with local optima. Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have emerged as the dominant framework for navigating this space, most notably demonstrated by the landmark work of Akiba et al. (2024). This approach generalizes model merging into two distinct optimization domains: Parameter Space (PS), which optimizes mixing weights (e.g., via SLERP or Task Arithmetic), and Data Flow Space (DFS), which optimizes the inference path by permuting or repeating layers from different models. By applying evolutionary strategies to these spaces, the authors successfully merged a Japanese LLM with a Math-specialized LLM to create a model that achieved state-of-the-art performance on Japanese math reasoning, a capability present in neither parent model individually. Their method employs population-based exploration where ”individuals” (merge recipes) undergo crossover and mutation, allowing the algorithm to discover non-intuitive architectures, such as the ”Franken-merge” structures where layers from different models are interleaved in novel sequences. The FuseLLM framework (Wan et al., 2024a) takes a complementary approach by fusing knowledge from multiple heterogeneous LLMs through lightweight continual training, while FuseChat (Wan et al., 2024a) extends this to chat models specifically. While Akiba et al. (2024) utilized Tree-structured Parzen Estimators (TPE) and evolutionary heuristics, other population-based strategies like Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) offer theoretical advantages for the continuous subspace of mixing coefficients. CMA-ES adaptively learns the covariance structure of high-fitness solutions, concentrating the search in promising regions of the coefficient simplex. However, the com-putational cost of fitness evaluation remains a bottleneck; typical evolutionary runs reported in the literature may require hundreds of candidate evaluations, consuming significant GPU hours. To mitigate this, practitioners often employ lower-fidelity proxies during the search phase, such as evaluating on small subsets of the validation data (e.g., minibatches of perplexity scores) before verifying top candidates on full benchmarks. As an alternative to evolutionary methods, Bayesian Optimization (BO) offers a more sample-efficient paradigm for finding optimal merge parameters. BO constructs a probabilistic surrogate model (typically a Gaussian Process) to approximate the fitness function F .By utilizing an acquisition function to balance exploration (sampling uncertain regions) and exploitation (sampling high-performing regions), BO can converge to optimal mixing coefficients with significantly fewer function evaluations than genetic algorithms. However, standard BO struggles with the high-dimensional, mixed-discrete nature of Data Flow Space optimization, making it more suitable for refining mixing coefficients ( α) once the architectural topology is fixed. Multi-objective formulations are essential when merged models must satisfy competing criteria, such as balancing safety alignment with reasoning capability. Pareto-based evo-lutionary algorithms, such as NSGA-II, maintain a population approximating the Pareto frontier, allowing practitioners to select trade-off solutions post-hoc. Such approaches are critical for ”generalist” merging, where a single scalar fitness function fails to capture the degradation in instruction following that often accompanies gains in domain-specific knowledge (Xiao et al., 2023). Table 7 summarizes the trade-offs between the primary search paradigms employed in automated model merging. Table 7: Comparison of Search Paradigms for Model Merging                 

> Search Paradigm Sample Efficiency Parallelizability Variable Handling Best Use Case
> Evolutionary Algorithms Low High Excellent Novel layer architectures Bayesian Optimization High Low Limited Fine-tuning coefficients Random Search Very Low Very High Good Baseline benchmarking

28 Preprint. Search-based model merging has shifted the field from manual heuristic design to au-tomated discovery. While evolutionary methods currently lead in discovering complex architectural combinations, the high computational cost of evaluation remains a barrier. Future research will likely converge on hybrid approaches that leverage the structural ex-ploration of evolution with the sample efficiency of Bayesian methods or surrogate-assisted optimization. 

Benchmarking evolutionary merging. Quantitative comparisons on the FusionBench suite (Tang et al., 2024b) reveal that CMA-ES-based search over layer-wise coefficients typically recovers 85–95% of the best oracle merge performance at roughly 10 × lower evalu-ation cost compared to exhaustive grid search, though the absolute gap varies substantially with model scale. For 7B-parameter LLMs, a single evolutionary run requires a non-trivial number of forward-pass evaluations, making it more expensive than data-free methods but still feasible for practitioners with moderate compute budgets. 

Limitations. Evolutionary and search-based methods share a fundamental dependence on the quality of the fitness function. When the evaluation metric is a poor proxy for downstream utility (e.g., perplexity for instruction-following), the discovered merge con-figurations may be suboptimal in practice. Additionally, the search space grows combina-torially with model depth: a Transformer with L layers and K candidate models admits 

O(KL) layer-wise configurations, making exhaustive search intractable beyond K = 3 or 

L > 40 without dimensionality reduction techniques such as block-wise grouping. How-ever, these search-based methods implicitly assume that parameters from different models can be meaningfully combined through direct arithmetic operations, an assumption that breaks down when constituent models have diverged substantially during independent fine-tuning, causing their internal representations to become geometrically incompatible despite encoding similar semantic information. 

5.4 Representation-Level Alignment and Cross-Model Matching Techniques 

Representation-level alignment and cross-model matching techniques directly address this geometric incompatibility challenge. When neural networks undergo substantial diver-gence during independent fine-tuning, their internal representations may encode seman-tically similar information in configurations that defeat simple arithmetic combination. While permutation alignment resolves the discrete symmetry inherent to hidden unit or-derings, it assumes that corresponding neurons exist across models in a one-to-one fashion. Representation-level methods relax this assumption by establishing soft correspondences that preserve functional relationships even when model components have undergone more complex transformations. The theoretical foundation for representation-level alignment rests on the observation that models fine-tuned from shared pretrained weights often learn similar internal represen-tations despite parametric divergence. This phenomenon motivates the application of optimal transport (OT) frameworks to model merging, where the goal is to find a coupling between the weight distributions of source models that minimizes transportation cost while preserving semantic structure. Given two models with weight matrices WA ∈ Rm×n and 

WB ∈ Rm×n, the optimal transport alignment seeks a permutation or soft assignment matrix 

P that minimizes ∥WA − PW B∥2 

> F

subject to constraints encoding valid matchings. Yang et al. (2024b) provide a taxonomy of such alignment strategies, noting that OT-based methods extend naturally to scenarios where exact permutation alignment is insufficient due to representational drift. Activation-based correspondence discovery offers an alternative paradigm that bypasses direct weight comparison by instead analyzing how models process identical inputs. The core insight is that layers with similar functional roles will produce correlated activation patterns on shared calibration data, even when their weights have diverged substantially. Formally, given activation matrices A(l) 

> A

and A(k) 

> B

from layers l and k of models A and 

B respectively, cross-model correspondence can be quantified through centered kernel 29 Preprint. alignment (CKA) or related similarity metrics. This enables not only same-layer alignment but also the discovery of correspondences between layers at different depths, which proves essential when fine-tuning has induced differential layer-wise adaptation rates. Cross-model feature matching extends these concepts by employing auxiliary objectives to guide alignment. Probe tasks, linear classifiers trained on intermediate representations to predict semantic properties, provide a mechanism for identifying which components encode functionally equivalent information. Yadav et al. (2024a) emphasize that model collaboration benefits substantially from such representation-level understanding, as it enables principled composition of specialized capabilities. Unlike purely geometric approaches that optimize alignment based on parameter statistics, probe-guided methods incorporate task-relevant semantic information, potentially yielding alignments that better preserve downstream performance. Handling architectural variations requires representation projection techniques that map activations from one model’s feature space into another’s. When source models differ in hidden dimensions or layer configurations, direct weight averaging becomes undefined. Projection-based approaches learn linear or nonlinear transformations ϕ : RdA → RdB that minimize reconstruction error on calibration activations while preserving task-relevant structure. These techniques connect intimately to neural network stitching, where layers from different models are composed through learned adapter modules. Yadav et al. (2024a) demonstrate that such modular composition strategies can effectively integrate diverse expert capabilities while maintaining computational efficiency through sparse activation patterns. The relationship between representation-level alignment and neural network stitching re-veals a spectrum of integration strategies. Stitching approaches preserve source model components intact while learning minimal connective tissue, whereas alignment-based merging produces unified parameter sets that blend source contributions. This distinc-tion between preserving model structure versus unifying parameters carries significant implications for computational efficiency, memory requirements, and the preservation of specialized capabilities, considerations that become particularly salient when scaling to multiple expert models. 

5.5 Comparative Analysis of Structural Preservation versus Parameter Unification Tradeoffs 

These implications become concrete when examining specific deployment scenarios where the structural preservation versus parameter unification dichotomy manifests as practical tradeoffs. Parameter unification methods, including weight averaging, task vector arith-metic, and Fisher-weighted merging, produce a single model with identical inference costs to any source model, making them attractive for resource-constrained deployment. Con-versely, structural preservation approaches such as Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures maintain distinct expert pathways, incurring additional memory overhead proportional to the number of integrated experts. Yang et al. (2024b) establish a comprehensive taxonomy that highlights this tradeoff, noting that unified models achieve parameter efficiency at the potential cost of capability interference, while structured approaches preserve expert specialization through architectural partitioning. The memory-computation tradeoff can be formalized by considering a base model with N

parameters being merged from K expert sources. Parameter unification produces a model of size N, whereas dense MoE preservation requires KN parameters plus routing overhead 

R. However, sparse activation patterns mitigate inference costs: if only k ≪ K experts activate per token, effective computation scales as kN + R rather than KN . demonstrates that weight-ensembling MoE approaches can achieve favorable efficiency-capability trade-offs by dynamically combining expert contributions through learned routing, effectively interpolating between full structural preservation and parameter unification (Yadav et al., 2024a). Capability retention patterns diverge substantially across these paradigms. Unified merging methods exhibit interference phenomena when source tasks compete for shared parameters, 30 Preprint. manifesting as degraded performance on individual tasks despite improved average multi-task scores. Akiba et al. (2024) find that model merging transcends simple aggregation, functioning as a transformative process that can yield emergent capabilities (Wei et al., 2022) exceeding source models. Nevertheless, this transformation introduces unpredictability in capability preservation. Structural preservation approaches circumvent direct interference by maintaining task-specific pathways, achieving near-complete retention of individual expert capabilities at the cost of increased architectural complexity. Flexibility considerations further differentiate these paradigms. Unified models support straightforward continual adaptation through additional fine-tuning or subsequent merging operations, as they conform to standard architectural specifications. Structural approaches require more sophisticated modification protocols: adding new experts necessitates router retraining, while removing experts may disrupt learned routing distributions. Yadav et al. (2024a) emphasize that model collaboration architectures must balance modularity against integration complexity, with structural preservation offering superior compositionality for scenarios requiring frequent expert addition or replacement. A decision framework for practitioners emerges from synthesizing these considerations. Parameter unification suits deployment-constrained scenarios where inference efficiency is paramount and moderate capability interference is acceptable, typical in general-purpose as-sistants requiring broad competence across multiple tasks. Structural preservation addresses applications demanding peak performance on specialized tasks without compromise, such as domain-specific enterprise deployments where computational resources are less con-strained than accuracy requirements. Hybrid approaches, exemplified by sparse MoE with weight-ensembled experts, occupy an intermediate position suitable for applications re-quiring scalable expertise integration with controlled computational growth. The optimal choice ultimately depends on the relative prioritization of capability fidelity, deployment efficiency, and architectural flexibility within specific application contexts. Understanding how unified parameter approaches achieve multi-task competence requires examining the mechanisms through which merged models acquire and combine diverse capabilities from their constituent sources. The structured and information-guided approaches examined in this section represent a methodological shift from treating model merging as purely parameter-space interpolation toward leveraging architectural knowledge, activation patterns, and systematic search to preserve functional capabilities while combining multiple models. These techniques navigate fundamental tradeoffs between maintaining expert specialization through routing mechanisms and achieving parameter efficiency through unification, with evolutionary and representation-alignment methods offering principled frameworks for discovering optimal configurations. With this technical foundation in place, the next section examines where and why such merging proves valuable in practice, organizing applications by their underlying motivations, whether seeking enhanced capabilities, improved alignment properties, or computational efficiency gains. 

## 6 Application Scenarios and Practical Impact 

We now shift focus from how models are merged to where and why . This section addresses the Scenarios dimension of our FUSE taxonomy, organizing applications by their underlying motivation. We examine three categories: capability-driven applications that leverage merging for enhanced performance and generalization, alignment-driven applications that target safety and value conformance, and efficiency-driven applications motivated by computational, communication, or resource constraints in settings such as federated learning and model compression. 

6.1 Capability Augmentation Through Multi-Task and Multilingual Merging 

Model merging provides a practical pathway for capability augmentation: rather than training monolithic models on aggregated datasets or maintaining costly ensembles, practi-31 Preprint. tioners can compose specialized abilities by merging independently fine-tuned models into a unified system (Ilharco et al., 2023). The theoretical foundation for multi-task capability merging rests on the observation that fine-tuned models sharing a common pretrained initialization occupy proximate regions in weight space, enabling meaningful interpolation between their specialized parameters. When multiple models are fine-tuned for distinct tasks, such as summarization, question answering, and code generation, the resulting task vectors encode complementary capa-bilities that can be arithmetically combined. The merged model θmerged = θbase + ∑ni=1 λiτi,where τi = θfine-tuned, i − θbase represents the task vector for task i and λi denotes its scaling coefficient, ideally inherits the union of capabilities from all constituent models. This for-mulation, introduced by Ilharco et al. (2023), demonstrated that task vector addition yields models capable of performing multiple tasks simultaneously, with experiments on LLMs showing that merging multiple task vectors maintained an average accuracy within 2-3% of individually fine-tuned models. Subsequent work (Yadav et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023) demonstrated that carefully guided task vector merging achieves strong performance across natural language processing tasks, validating the practical viability of this mathematical formulation. However, na ¨ıve task vector addition often suffers from parameter interference when merg-ing multiple models, where redundant or conflicting parameter updates across tasks degrade performance. Several sophisticated methods address this challenge. TIES-Merging (Yadav et al., 2023) introduces a three-step procedure, trimming low-magnitude parameters, elect-ing sign consensus, and merging only aligned parameters, which reduces interference by trimming, sign election, and aligned merging on T5 (Raffel et al., 2020)-based multi-task benchmarks. DARE (Yu et al., 2023) takes a complementary approach by randomly drop-ping delta parameters with high probability and rescaling remaining values, exploiting the observation that fine-tuning induces sparse, redundant changes; this method enabled successful merging of up to six specialized LLMs while preserving over 90% of individual task performance. More recent approaches such as Model Stock (Jang et al., 2024) leverage geometric insights about the fine-tuning loss landscape, demonstrating that averaging models from the vicinity of the optimal weight region yields superior merged models with only two to three fine-tuned constituents required. EMR-Merging (Huang et al., 2024) achieves tuning-free high-performance model merging through elastic mask re-weighting. Twin-Merging (Lu et al., 2024) introduces dynamic integration of modular expertise, while PCB-Merging (Du et al., 2024) addresses parameter competition (Du et al., 2024) balancing. AdaMerging (Yang et al., 2024d) provides adaptive model merging specifically designed for multi-task learning (Aghajanyan et al., 2021) scenarios. Instruction tuning consolidation represents a particularly impactful application of capability merging in the large language model ecosystem. Individual instruction-tuned models such as WizardLM (Xu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024d) often excel on specific instruction formats or task categories while exhibiting degraded performance on others. By merging multiple instruction-tuned variants, each optimized for different instruction styles, complexity levels, or domain coverage, practitioners can construct unified models that demonstrate robust instruction-following across diverse prompting scenarios. Empirical studies demonstrate the efficacy of this approach: reported methods have achieved 99.4% of the performance of traditional multi-task training on instruction-following benchmarks while requiring no additional training. Similarly, experiments merging WizardLM, WizardMath (Luo et al., 2023), and code-specialized variants such as Code Llama (Rozi `ere et al., 2023) showed 8-12% improvements on aggregate benchmarks compared to individual constituents (Li et al., 2023a). LM-Cocktail (Xiao et al., 2023) further demonstrates resilient tuning through strate-gic model merging. FuseLLM (Wan et al., 2024a) takes a complementary approach by fusing the knowledge of multiple structurally diverse LLMs through lightweight continual training on probability distributions generated by the source models, enabling cross-architecture knowledge transfer that traditional weight-space methods cannot achieve. This consolida-tion approach is widely used in community-driven model development, where independent contributors fine-tune base models on complementary instruction datasets. 32 Preprint. Multilingual capability transfer through merging addresses the challenge of building lan-guage models that perform well across typologically diverse languages. Conventional approaches require either massive multilingual pretraining corpora or accept degraded performance on low-resource languages. Model merging offers an alternative pathway: spe-cialized models fine-tuned on individual languages or language families can be combined to transfer cross-lingual capabilities (Huang et al., 2023b). Huang et al. (2023b) demon-strated that identifying and preserving language-specific neuronal subnetworks during merging enables effective cross-lingual transfer without catastrophic forgetting of source language capabilities. Chat Vector (Huang et al., 2023b;b) provides a simple yet effective approach to equip LLMs with instruction-following and model alignment capabilities in new languages through task vector manipulation. Complementary work on cross-lingual model merging (Huang et al., 2023b) showed that interpolating between English-specialized and target-language models improved low-resource language performance by 15-20% on XNLI benchmarks compared to English-only fine-tuned baselines. This proves particularly effective when merging models that share vocabulary coverage but differ in their language-specific fine-tuning. Recent investigations into language-agnostic and language-specific parameter separation suggest that modular approaches, merging language-specific adapters rather than full models, offer finer-grained control over cross-lingual capability composition while mitigating interference between typologically distant language pairs. The practical impact of capability merging is evidenced by its adoption in open-source communities, where merged models have demonstrated measurable performance gains on standardized evaluation suites. For instance, analysis of Open LLM Leaderboard sub-missions revealed that merged models constituted a substantial portion of top-performing entries, with specific combinations such as instruction-tuned and reasoning-specialized merges achieving 3-7% absolute improvements over their strongest constituents (Yadav et al., 2024a). However, capability merging exhibits well-documented failure modes that practitioners must consider. Negative transfer occurs most frequently when constituent tasks impose conflicting optimization pressures, for example, merging models fine-tuned for concise summarization with those trained for detailed elaboration often yields degraded performance on both objectives (Yadav et al., 2023). Empirical analyses (Yadav et al., 2023) identified that task dissimilarity, measured through gradient conflict metrics, strongly predicts merge quality degradation, with highly dissimilar task pairs showing up to 25% performance drops compared to individual models. Furthermore, (Li et al., 2023a) demon-strated that representation bias toward dominant tasks emerges when merging models with imbalanced training scales, requiring explicit representation alignment to mitigate. These findings underscore that successful capability augmentation depends critically on careful task selection and appropriate interference mitigation strategies. While such capability en-hancement represents the predominant application of model merging, task vector arithmetic and parameter combination extend naturally to improving alignment with human values and mitigating safety risks. 

Domain adaptation via adapter merging. AdapterSoup (Chronopoulou et al., 2023) demonstrates that averaging domain-specific adapters can surpass any individual adapter when the target domain overlaps with multiple training domains, outperforming individ-ual adapter selection on held-out domains. LoRAHub (Huang et al., 2023a) extends this principle to few-shot scenarios, composing LoRA modules through gradient-free Bayesian optimization over combination weights. Critically, these adapter-level approaches reduce the merge cost from O(|θ|) to O(r · d) where r ≪ d is the adapter rank, making iterative composition practical even for 70B-parameter models. 

6.2 Alignment, Safety, and Bias Mitigation Applications 

Model merging has also emerged as a cost-effective paradigm for improving alignment with human values and mitigating safety risks in deployed language models. The fundamental insight motivating these approaches is that preference-aligned models, typically trained through reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), or direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023), can be combined with capable base models to achieve favorable tradeoffs between helpfulness (Liang et al., 2025) and 33 Preprint. harmlessness without incurring the substantial computational costs of full alignment train-ing. This approach complements constitutional methods by enabling post-hoc alignment adjustment through parameter-space operations rather than requiring extensive retraining with curated feedback. The task vector formalism provides a particularly elegant mechanism for targeted bias mitigation (Ilharco et al., 2023). Given a base model with parameters θbase and a model fine-tuned to exhibit specific biased behaviors θbiased , the bias task vector τbias = θbiased − θbase 

encodes the parametric representation of the undesired behavior. Through task vector negation, a debiased model can be constructed as θdebiased = θbase − α · τbias , where the scaling coefficient α controls the intensity of bias removal. This subtractive approach enables surgical removal of specific behavioral patterns, including toxic language generation, demographic stereotyping, and harmful content production, without degrading the model’s core linguistic competencies. However, a significant practical limitation of this formulation is the requirement for an explicitly fine-tuned θbiased model that isolates the undesired behavior. Recent work addresses this challenge through probe-based bias identification and activation steering methods, which enable bias vector estimation without requiring explicit fine-tuning on harmful objectives (Li et al., 2023a). Beyond task arithmetic, alternative merging methodologies offer distinct mechanisms for alignment preservation. TIES-Merging addresses parameter interference through sign-based conflict resolution, which proves particularly valuable when merging models aligned on potentially conflicting value dimensions by preserving the dominant alignment signal in each parameter (Yadav et al., 2023). Fisher-weighted merging leverages parameter impor-tance estimates to prioritize safety-critical weights during combination, enabling assign higher Fisher information scores to parameters associated with alignment behaviors (Li et al., 2023a). DARE employs random parameter pruning before merging, which empirical studies suggest can reduce the propagation of misaligned behaviors embedded in redundant parameters (Yu et al., 2023). The merging of RLHF-trained models presents unique opportunities and challenges for alignment enhancement. When multiple models have been independently aligned using different preference datasets or reward models, their combination can potentially yield more robust alignment that generalizes across diverse value dimensions (Ram’e et al., 2024). The interpolation θmerged = ( 1 − λ)θhelpful + λθ harmless between helpfulness-optimized and harmlessness-optimized variants enables practitioners to navigate the alignment tradeoff frontier (Ram’e et al., 2024; 2023b), selecting operating points appropriate for specific deploy-ment contexts. Empirical investigations reveal that intermediate interpolation coefficients often outperform both endpoints on aggregate preference metrics, suggesting that merged models capture complementary aspects of human preferences that neither constituent model fully represents (Ram’e et al., 2024). This finding has been corroborated across multiple model families (Li et al., 2023a). Evaluating alignment preservation in merged models requires multi-faceted assessment protocols spanning automated metrics, benchmark evaluations, and adversarial testing. Standard safety benchmarks provide quantitative measures of factuality, toxicity, and so-cial bias respectively. Red-teaming protocols systematically probe merged models for adversarial vulnerabilities that may emerge from parameter combination, while automated red-teaming approaches enable scalable safety evaluation (Wan et al., 2024b). Reward model scoring on held-out preference data offers another evaluation dimension, with recent work proposing specialized metrics for detecting alignment degradation after merging. Notably, evaluation must assess not only aggregate safety metrics but also consistency of alignment across capability levels, as merged models may exhibit capability-dependent safety profiles (Djuhera et al., 2025). Despite these advances, alignment-focused merging faces several known limitations that warrant careful consideration. First, the capability-safety tradeoff proves difficult to navigate in practice: aggressive bias removal via task vector negation frequently degrades model fluency and task performance, while conservative merging may inadequately address safety concerns (Ram’e et al., 2024). Second, isolating clean bias vectors remains challenging when biased behaviors are entangled with legitimate capabilities, for instance, removing 34 Preprint. gender bias associations may inadvertently impair performance on gender-related factual queries. Third, validation presents fundamental difficulties: merged models may exhibit emergent unsafe behaviors not present in constituent models, yet comprehensive safety evaluation across all possible inputs remains intractable. Finally, the alignment properties of merged models may be more brittle than those of directly trained models, showing greater susceptibility to jailbreaking attacks (Djuhera et al., 2025). Safety-aware merging strategies have gained prominence in addressing adversarial vul-nerabilities of merged models. Recent work on mitigating backdoor effects in multi-task model merging through safety-aware subspace identification (Djuhera et al., 2025) high-lights growing recognition that naive merging may inadvertently propagate or amplify security vulnerabilities present in constituent models. SafeMERGE (Djuhera et al., 2025) proposes selective layer-wise model merging to preserve safety alignment in fine-tuned LLMs. These approaches project merged parameters onto subspaces that preserve safety-critical behaviors while enabling capability transfer, often leveraging activation analysis to identify safety-relevant parameter subspaces (Djuhera et al., 2025). WARM (Ram’e et al., 2024) demonstrates the benefits of weight averaged reward models for improving alignment robustness. This represents a principled integration of security considerations into the merging pipeline. The healthcare domain exemplifies the critical importance of alignment-preserving merging strategies, where domain-specialized models must maintain stringent safety properties including factual accuracy, appropriate uncertainty quantification, and avoidance of harmful medical advice (Li et al., 2023a). To address these requirements, researchers have developed uncertainty-aware merging protocols that combine clinical fine-tuned models with safety-aligned base models using Fisher-weighted averaging, prioritizing parameters associated with calibrated uncertainty estimation. Additionally, factual consistency constraints during merging, implemented through knowledge-preserving regularization terms, help ensure that clinical expertise transfer does not compromise factual guardrails established during alignment training. Domain-specific evaluation protocols for merged medical models now incorporate clinical accuracy benchmarks alongside standard safety metrics, enabling comprehensive assessment of the capability-safety balance (Li et al., 2023a). Similarly, cybersecurity applications demand rigorous attention to the security implications of model merging, as merged models may exhibit unexpected vulnerabilities arising from the combination of individually benign model components (Li et al., 2023a). This observation has spurred investigation into adversarial robustness preservation during merging, with emerging techniques incorporating explicit security constraints into the merging objective. Specifically, robust merging protocols for security-critical applications employ adversarial example validation during coefficient tuning, rejecting merge configurations that degrade performance on curated attack datasets. Furthermore, differential testing between merged and constituent models enables detection of emergent vulnerabilities unique to the merged configuration (Li et al., 2023a). These domain-specific considerations become even more complex when merging must occur across organizationally or geographically distributed settings, where data privacy constraints and communication limitations introduce additional challenges that significantly reshape how model combination can be performed. 

Dual-use risks and limitations. The same arithmetic that enables safety injection also enables safety removal : subtracting the alignment task vector τsafe from a safety-tuned model can recover an unaligned variant, raising concerns about misuse (Ilharco et al., 2023). Furthermore, reward model merging via WARM (Ram’e et al., 2024) has shown that averaging independently trained reward models reduces reward hacking susceptibility by 4–7% on the RewardBench suite, but the optimal number of reward models to merge and the conditions under which averaging preserves reward calibration remain theoretically uncharacterized. These dual-use considerations necessitate community-level governance frameworks for responsible model merging. 35 Preprint. 

6.3 Efficiency-Driven Applications in Federated and Distributed Learning 

These distributed settings significantly reshape how model combination can be performed. Model merging assumes particular significance in such contexts where computational re-sources are geographically dispersed and data privacy constraints preclude centralized training. Federated learning represents the canonical application scenario, wherein multiple client devices or institutions independently fine-tune local model copies on private datasets, subsequently aggregating these models at a central server without transmitting raw training data. The foundational Federated Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm (McMahan et al., 2017) implements precisely this paradigm, performing weighted averaging of client model pa-rameters according to local dataset sizes: θglobal = ∑Kk=1 

> nk
> n

θk, where nk denotes the number of samples at client k and n represents the total sample count across all participants. This formulation directly instantiates the uniform averaging principles discussed in Section 3, connecting federated learning directly to weight-space interpolation theory. The extension of federated learning to large language models introduces substantial chal-lenges absent in smaller-scale settings. Communication bandwidth constraints become particularly acute when synchronizing models with billions of parameters across potentially unreliable network connections. To address this limitation, researchers have developed communication-efficient aggregation protocols that transmit only sparse parameter updates or low-rank approximations of weight differences rather than complete model states (McMa-han et al., 2017). These approaches leverage the sparsification principles underlying TIES-Merging and DARE, transmitting trimmed task vectors that capture essential fine-tuning modifications while dramatically reducing bandwidth requirements. The mathematical formulation adapts naturally: clients compute local task vectors τk = θk − θbase , apply sparsi-fication operators to retain only high-magnitude parameters, and transmit these compressed representations for server-side aggregation. The branch-train-merge paradigm offers an alternative distributed training strategy particu-larly suited for large-scale model development. Rather than continuously synchronizing parameters during training, this approach allows independent branches to diverge sub-stantially before periodic merging operations consolidate progress. This strategy proves especially effective when training specialized experts on distinct data domains, as the reduced synchronization frequency enables more efficient utilization of heterogeneous computational resources. The theoretical viability of branch-train-merge depends critically on maintaining mode connectivity between diverging branches, a property that shared pretrained initialization generally ensures for moderate fine-tuning dur.[truncated] Deployment optimization through model consolidation represents another efficiency-driven application with significant practical implications. Organizations frequently maintain mul-tiple specialized models fine-tuned for distinct tasks or domains, incurring substantial inference costs from running parallel model instances. Deployment efficiency is critically important for edge computing scenarios where computational resources are severely con-strained. Model merging enables consolidating multiple specialized variants into unified systems that serve diverse requirements through a single inference pathway, dramatically reducing memory footprint and operational costs. This consolidation proves particularly valuable for edge deployment scenarios where resource limitations prohibit maintaining separate model instances for different functionalities. Scalability considerations present fundamental challenges for merging operations across large participant populations. The computational complexity of pairwise alignment proce-dures, required when clients lack shared initialization, scales quadratically with participant count, making naive approaches intractable at scale. Hierarchical aggregation strategies address this limitation through recursive merging of participant subgroups, reducing effec-tive complexity while potentially sacrificing solution quality. Furthermore, the statistical heterogeneity characteristic of federated settings, wherein local data distributions exhibit substantial divergence, can compromise mode connectivity assumptions underlying suc-cessful merging, necessitating adaptive aggregation strategies that account for inter-client distribution shifts. While these distributed and efficiency-driven applications address com-36 Preprint. putational and privacy constraints, model merging also serves a complementary purpose in reconciling specialized domain expertise with general-purpose capabilities. 

6.4 Domain Specialization While Preserving General Capabilities 

Domain specialization exemplifies this reconciliation challenge, presenting a fundamental tension in the development of large language models: while foundation models exhibit broad competence across diverse tasks, achieving expert-level performance in specialized domains such as healthcare, legal, scientific, or cybersecurity applications typically requires focused fine-tuning that risks degrading general-purpose capabilities. Model merging has emerged as a principled approach for resolving this tension, enabling the integration of domain-specific expertise while preserving the broad knowledge encoded in pretrained foundations. The mathematical formulation underlying this capability balance can be expressed as θmerged = ( 1 − α)θbase + αθ domain , where the interpolation coefficient α governs the trade-off between domain expertise and general versatility. Healthcare applications exemplify the critical importance of this capability preservation challenge. As comprehensively surveyed in (Yang et al., 2024b), medical language models must navigate the dual requirements of clinical accuracy and broad conversational com-petence. Fine-tuning foundation models on clinical corpora, including electronic health records, medical literature, and diagnostic guidelines, produces models with enhanced biomedical reasoning but frequently compromised performance on general language under-standing tasks. Model merging addresses this limitation by combining clinically fine-tuned variants with their general-purpose ancestors, producing unified systems that maintain diagnostic capability while preserving the linguistic fluency essential for patient communi-cation. The interpolation coefficient in healthcare merging scenarios typically favors domain expertise ( α ∈ [0.6, 0.8 ]) for clinical decision support applications while emphasizing general capabilities ( α ∈ [0.3, 0.5 ]) for patient-facing conversational interfaces. Cybersecurity applications present analogous challenges with distinct technical character-istics. Multiple specialized capabilities are required for security applications, including vulnerability detection, malware analysis, and threat intelligence processing. Similarly, language models can be adapted for both offensive and defensive security tasks. Merging strategies for cybersecurity domains must balance technical security knowledge with gen-eral reasoning capabilities, as effective security analysis frequently requires synthesizing domain-specific threat models with broader contextual understanding. Unlike healthcare applications where domain boundaries are relatively well-defined, cybersecurity merging often involves combining models specialized for distinct security subtasks, code vulnerabil-ity detection, network traffic analysis, and social engineering detection, into unified security assistants. Legal and regulatory compliance domains introduce additional complexity through the requirement for jurisdiction-specific knowledge preservation during merging. Models fine-tuned on legal corpora from different jurisdictions may encode conflicting regula-tory frameworks, necessitating careful management of task vector interactions during the merging process. The task vector formulation provides natural mechanisms for such management: representing jurisdiction-specific adaptations as separate vectors enables controlled combination through weighted aggregation that respects regulatory boundaries. Recent advances in data-free merging demonstrate that sophisticated guidance mechanisms can achieve superior performance without requiring access to original training distributions, a property particularly valuable for legal applications where training data may be subject to confidentiality constraints. Scientific and technical domains benefit from hierarchical merging strategies that progres-sively specialize from general scientific reasoning to field-specific expertise. A foundation model might first be merged with a broadly scientific variant before incorporating narrower specializations in chemistry, physics, or biology. This hierarchical approach leverages the compositional properties of task arithmetic while managing the increased interference po-tential arising from multiple simultaneous specializations. The interpolation coefficient optimization for scientific merging often employs validation sets spanning both general 37 Preprint. scientific literacy and domain-specific benchmarks, enabling automated discovery of Pareto-optimal coefficient configurations that maximize the joint performance frontier. Across all these domain specialization scenarios, the effectiveness of merging strategies ultimately depends on systematic assessment methodologies capable of quantifying both capability retention and cross-domain interference. 

6.5 Evaluation Methodologies and Benchmarking for Merged Model Assessment 

Given the critical dependence of domain-specific merging strategies on systematic assess-ment, the rigorous evaluation of merged models presents unique methodological challenges that extend beyond standard model assessment paradigms, requiring frameworks capable of capturing capability retention, multi-task performance, and interference effects simultane-ously. Unlike evaluation of single-task fine-tuned models, merged model assessment must quantify both the preservation of individual source model capabilities and the emergent properties arising from their combination, necessitating evaluation protocols that probe along multiple orthogonal dimensions. Standardized benchmarking for merged models typically employs composite evaluation suites that aggregate performance across the constituent tasks represented in the source models. The evaluation protocol computes task-specific performance metrics Pmerged  

> i

for each task i in the set of source tasks T , comparing against the performance of individual fine-tuned models Pft  

> i

to compute retention ratios Ri = Pmerged  

> i

/Pft  

> i

. The aggregate retention metric, often computed as the geometric mean across tasks Rgeo = ( ∏i∈T Ri)1/ |T | , provides a single scalar summary that penalizes severe degradation on any individual task while re-maining interpretable. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that advanced merging methods such as TIES-Merging and task arithmetic approaches can achieve retention ratios exceeding 0.95 on certain NLP classification tasks; however, this strong retention is most consistently observed when merging models of similar scale (typically 7B parameters or fewer), when source tasks exhibit semantic relatedness, and when employing interference-aware merging strategies. Performance degradation becomes more pronounced for knowledge-intensive tasks, generative benchmarks, and scenarios involving dissimilar task combinations, where retention ratios may fall to 0.80–0.90 or lower. Concrete benchmark suites have become essential for standardized merged model evalua-tion. For language models, commonly employed benchmarks include MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021) for broad knowledge assessment, HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019) for common-sense reasoning, WinoGrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2020) for coreference resolution, ARC (Clark et al., 2018) for scientific reasoning, GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) for mathematical problem-solving, and TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022) for factual accuracy and hallucination detection. These benchmarks serve complementary evaluation purposes: MMLU and ARC probe knowledge retention across diverse domains, HellaSwag and WinoGrande assess reason-ing capabilities that may benefit from cross-task transfer, while GSM8K and TruthfulQA evaluate specialized competencies that are particularly susceptible to interference during merging. For code generation capabilities, HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) serves as a standard benchmark. Interference detection methodologies focus on identifying performance degradation pat-terns that emerge specifically from the merging process rather than from limitations of individual source models. A principled interference metric computes the pairwise perfor-mance difference ∆ij = Pmerged (i,j) 

> i

− Pmerged (i) 

> i

comparing merged model performance on task i when combined with task j versus in isolation. Systematic negative values indicate destructive interference, while positive values suggest beneficial cross-task transfer. The interference matrix I with entries Iij = ∆ij provides a view of task interactions, enabling identify problematic task combinations and guide selective merging decisions. Recent work on representation analysis provides complementary tools for understanding how merged representations differ from their source models at intermediate layers. Cross-task generalization assessment extends evaluation beyond source task performance to probe whether merged models exhibit capabilities that transcend their constituent spe-38 Preprint. cializations. This evaluation dimension addresses the hypothesis that successful merging produces models with compositional generalization, the ability to combine knowledge from different source tasks to solve novel problems. Evaluation protocols for compositional generalization employ held-out tasks that require simultaneous application of multiple specialized capabilities, measuring whether the merged model outperforms any individual source model on these composite benchmarks. Research on weight averaging (Izmailov et al., 2018) demonstrated that weight averaging can yield improved out-of-distribution generalization, motivating subsequent investigation into the generalization properties of more sophisticated merging schemes. Beyond task-specific accuracy, comprehensive merged model evaluation increasingly incor-porates calibration assessment, out-of-distribution robustness testing, and computational efficiency comparisons. Calibration evaluation measures whether merged model confidence scores accurately reflect empirical correctness probabilities, as merging may distort the cali-bration properties of source models even when accuracy is preserved. Expected calibration error (ECE) and reliability diagrams provide standard tools for this assessment. Out-of-distribution robustness testing evaluates merged model performance on inputs drawn from distributions distinct from source task training data, using benchmarks designed to probe distributional shift sensitivity. Computational efficiency comparisons quantify inference latency, memory footprint, and throughput characteristics relative to ensemble baselines and individual source models, contextualizing accuracy gains against resource requirements. Community evaluation has converged on leaderboard-based methodologies that standard-ize comparison across research groups. Standardized evaluation frameworks (Alcover-Couso et al., 2024) have emerged for reproducible LLM evaluation, supporting consistent benchmark execution across diverse model architectures. The Open LLM Leaderboard hosted by Hugging Face aggregates performance across standardized benchmark suites (He et al., 2025), enabling direct comparison of merged models against conventionally trained baselines and facilitating community-driven progress tracking. Model hub infrastructure on platforms such as Hugging Face additionally supports merged model sharing, enabling reproduction and extension of published results. Recent investigations into evaluation methodology highlight the importance of statistical rigor in merged model assessment, advocating for confidence intervals and significance testing when comparing merging meth-ods given the variance inherent in benchmark evaluation. The adoption of multi-objective evaluation frameworks that simultaneously assess helpfulness, harmlessness, and honesty dimensions reflects the understanding that merged model quality cannot be captured by a single metric, especially in safety-critical deployments. FusionBench (Tang et al., 2024b) addresses this gap by providing a unified evaluation suite covering 25+ merging methods across language tasks, enabling consistent cross-method comparison. It introduces task retention rate (TRR), defined as TRR = 1 

> K

∑Ki=1Perf merged, i 

> Perf source, i

, as a standardized metric quantifying how much of each source model’s capability survives the merge. On LLM benchmarks, TRR provides actionable guidance for practitioners comparing simple averaging against advanced interference-aware methods. Despite these advances, significant evaluation gaps persist in the merged model literature. Standardized benchmarks specifically designed to measure interference effects remain lack-ing, forcing researchers to rely on indirect comparison methodologies that may obscure subtle capability degradation. Evaluation protocols for emergent capabilities, skills present in merged models but absent from all source models—remain poorly developed, limiting understanding of when and why beneficial emergence occurs. These persistent challenges notwithstanding, the collective progress across merging methodologies, theoretical under-standing, and evaluation practices provides a foundation for synthesizing the current state of the field and identifying the most promising directions for future research. The diverse application scenarios examined in this section demonstrate that model merging has matured from a theoretical curiosity into a practical paradigm with tangible impact across capability augmentation, safety alignment, federated learning, and domain special-ization, while the evaluation methodologies discussed provide essential frameworks for rigorously assessing merged model quality. These real-world deployments and assessment 39 Preprint. Table 8: Comparison of application scenarios and practical approaches in model merging. 

Application Scenario Key Approach Key Feature(s) Limitations/Notes Year Multi-Task Merging Synthesize special-ized fine-tuned models into unified system Enhanced multi-task gen-eralization; computation-ally efficient Potential task interfer-ence; requires careful weight balancing 2023 

Multilingual Merging Combine language-specific models Cross-lingual capability transfer; unified multilin-gual system Language imbalance; varying quality across languages 2023 

RLHF Alignment Merge preference-aligned models trained via reinforce-ment learning Improved human value alignment; safety en-hancement High computational cost; reward hacking risks 2022 

DPO Alignment Direct preference op-timization without re-ward modeling Simplified training pipeline; stable optimiza-tion Limited to pairwise pref-erences; distribution shift issues 2023 

Federated Averaging Aggregate locally fine-tuned models without data sharing Privacy preservation; dis-tributed computation Communication over-head; non-IID data challenges 2017 

Multi-Benchmark Evaluation Simultaneous assess-ment across diverse task suites Capability retention mea-surement; interference quantification Benchmark selection bias; limited emergent prop-erty capture 2024      

> SWA (2018)
> Izmailov et al.
> Linear Mode Connectivity (2020)
> Frankle et al.
> FOUNDATIONS
> 2018–2020
> Model Soups
> Wortsman et al.
> Fisher Merging
> Matena & Raffel
> WEIGHT AVERAGING
> 2022
> Task Arithmetic
> Ilharco et al.
> TIES-Merging
> Yadav et al.
> DARE
> Yu et al.
> TASK VECTORS
> 2023
> AdaMerging
> Yang et al.
> Evolutionary
> Akiba et al.
> ADAPTIVE SEARCH
> 2024
> MoE Routing
> PHATGOOSE
> FusionBench
> Tang et al.
> MergeKit
> Goddard et al.
> ECOSYSTEM
> 2024–2025

Figure 4: Evolution of model merging techniques. The field progressed from foundational loss landscape theory (2018–2020), through weight-space averaging (2022) and interference-aware task vectors (2023), to adaptive/evolutionary optimization and standardized ecosys-tem tooling (2024–2025). Arrows indicate the conceptual flow and inheritance of ideas across phases. practices naturally raise questions about the supporting infrastructure, persistent limitations, and emerging opportunities that will shape the field’s evolution. Beyond these specific application scenarios, the continued advancement of model merging relies heavily on the broader ecosystem of tools, benchmarks, and community resources. Table 8 summarizes these application scenarios. The following section examines this infrastructure, alongside a synthesis of open challenges and future research directions that will determine the trajec-tory of model merging as a foundational paradigm. Table 5 provides a cross-dimensional comparison of all methods. 

## 7 Ecosystem, Open Challenges, and Future Directions 

7.1 Summary of Contributions 

With this foundation in place, we now turn to synthesizing the broader state of model merging research. This survey has presented a comprehensive examination of model merg-ing in the era of large language models, systematically organizing the rapidly expanding landscape of techniques, theoretical foundations, and practical applications. Our central con-tribution is the unified taxonomic framework that categorizes merging methodologies along multiple dimensions (Table 5 summarizes the characteristics of each category): weight-space averaging and geometric interpolation methods that treat parameters as points in Euclidean or manifold spaces; task vector arithmetic and sparsification-enhanced approaches that conceptualize fine-tuning as composable vector displacements; and structured information-40 Preprint. guided methods that preserve architectural distinctions or leverage runtime statistics for principled combination. Beyond methodological categorization, we have synthesizedd the theoretical underpinnings that explain merging success, including loss landscape geometry, linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020), and weight space symmetries, providing researchers with the conceptual tools necessary to understand when and why merging suc-ceeds. We have further connected these methods to diverse application scenarios spanning capability augmentation, alignment and safety, and efficiency-driven distributed learning contexts. This comprehensive mapping of the methodological and theoretical landscape provides the vantage point from which to identify the key trends that have characterized the field’s technical evolution, as depicted in Figure 4. 

7.2 Technical Evolution Trends 

Looking across the methodological landscape, several notable trends characterize the tech-nical evolution of model merging. First, the field has progressed from simple uniform averaging toward increasingly sophisticated interference-aware methods that explicitly address sign conflicts and parameter redundancy through sparsification and consensus mechanisms. Second, there has been a marked shift from static, manually-specified merg-ing configurations toward automated and evolutionary approaches that discover optimal recipes through search and optimization. Third, the community has increasingly recognized the importance of representation-level information, moving beyond purely weight-space operations to incorporate activation statistics and functional correspondence into merging decisions. Fourth, the scale of merging applications has expanded dramatically, from com-bining a handful of fine-tuned variants to orchestrating complex multi-model compositions that integrate dozens of specialized experts. Finally, the tight coupling between theoretical understanding and algorithmic innovation has accelerated, with insights from mode con-nectivity theory directly informing practical method design. While these trends collectively demonstrate remarkable progress toward principled model combination, they also illumi-nate the boundaries of current understanding and point toward substantial challenges that continue to limit the field’s advancement. 

7.3 Open Challenges and Limitations 

Several open challenges remain. First, a rigorous theoretical explanation for why large pretrained models exhibit such favorable mergeability is still lacking; current understanding relies on empirical observations rather than formal guarantees (He et al., 2025; Nobari et al., 2025). Second, scalability poses a significant barrier: as models grow to hundreds of billions of parameters, alignment and conflict resolution costs scale super-linearly. Third, standardized evaluation protocols remain absent—the field lacks consensus benchmarks that measure both individual task retention and cross-task transfer after merging. Fourth, the absence of established best practices for selecting merge configurations (which models to merge, at what granularity, with which algorithm) hinders practitioners’ ability to make principled decisions. 

7.4 Future Research Directions 

The open challenges identified above naturally point toward several promising research frontiers that could significantly advance the field of model merging. 

Automated and Predictive Merging Systems. Among the most immediately impactful of these emerging research directions is developing systems that can automatically predict merging outcomes and recommend optimal configurations without exhaustive experimen-tation. Current approaches require substantial trial-and-error to identify effective merge recipes, representing a significant barrier to practical adoption. Future work should focus on learning predictive models that estimate merged model performance from properties of constituent models, such as gradient alignment, representation similarity, and task re-latedness, enabling rapid configuration selection. The formal objective can be expressed 41 Preprint. as: 

C(θ1, . . . , θk) = fϕ(Sim (θi, θj), Task (θi), Arch (θi)) → E[Perf (Merge (θ1, . . . , θk))] (11) where fϕ is a learned compatibility function parameterized by ϕ. Such systems could substantially reduce the experimental overhead of merging while improving accessibility for practitioners without deep expertise in merging methodology. 

Cross-Architecture and Heterogeneous Model Merging. Extending merging capabilities beyond architecturally identical models represents a transformative research opportunity. Current constraints requiring shared architecture and initialization exclude vast repositories of independently developed models from participation in merging workflows. Key research directions include: • Representation-level translation mechanisms : Learning mappings between feature spaces of different architectures • Architecture-agnostic knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) : Transferring capabilities without requiring parameter correspondence • Learned correspondence mappings : Establishing soft alignments between func-tionally equivalent components across model families • Hybrid merging strategies : Combining parameter-level and representation-level operations for heterogeneous models Success in this direction would unlock considerable flexibility in composing capabilities from diverse model ecosystems. 

Dynamic and Continual Merging. Real-world deployment scenarios increasingly require models that can continuously incorporate new capabilities without full retraining. Dynamic merging systems that can incrementally integrate new expert models, adapt merging coef-ficients based on runtime performance feedback, and handle concept drift in constituent model capabilities represent an underexplored frontier. The mathematical formulation for continual merging extends the static case: 

θ(t+1) 

> merged

= Update (θ(t)

> merged

, θnew , Dval ) (12) where the Update function must balance incorporating new knowledge while preserving previously merged capabilities. 

Theoretical Foundations and Guarantees. Establishing rigorous theoretical foundations for model merging remains a critical priority. Key open questions include: • Under what conditions does merged model performance provably exceed that of constituent models? • How can we characterize the sample complexity of learning optimal merging coefficients? • What are the fundamental limits of capability preservation during parameter com-bination? • Can we develop PAC-style learning bounds for merged model generalization? Progress on these theoretical questions would transform model merging from an empirical art into a principled engineering discipline. 

Frequency-Domain and Knowledge-Level Merging. Recent work has begun explor-ing merging in alternative representational spaces beyond the standard weight domain. FREE-Merging (Zheng & Wang, 2025) proposes performing model merging in the Fourier transform domain, decomposing task vectors into frequency components and applying lightweight expert modules to selectively recombine them, achieving state-of-the-art results 42 Preprint. on multi-task benchmarks (ICCV 2025). Concurrently, Fu et al. (2025) introduce model merging as a mechanism for knowledge editing, demonstrating that targeted task vector manipulations can insert, update, or erase factual knowledge in LLMs without retraining. These directions suggest that the conceptual toolkit for model merging extends well beyond simple parameter averaging. 

Safety-Aware and Alignment-Preserving Merging. As merged models see increasing deployment in safety-critical applications, developing merging frameworks that provide formal guarantees about alignment preservation becomes essential. Future work should investigate: • Certified merging procedures that bound alignment degradation • Adversarial robustness preservation during parameter combination • Interpretable merging that enables post-hoc analysis of capability transfer • Red-teaming frameworks specifically designed for merged models 

7.5 Outlook 

Model merging has evolved from simple checkpoint averaging into a sophisticated paradigm for composing specialized capabilities into unified systems. The proliferation of openly available fine-tuned LLMs has created unprecedented opportunities for leverag-ing merging techniques to democratize access to multi-capability AI. The community has developed.[truncated] Looking forward, we anticipate that model merging will become an increasingly central component of the machine learning pipeline, with several key trends shaping the field’s trajectory: 1. Integration with Automated ML : Merging configuration discovery will become increasingly automated through neural architecture search and hyperparameter optimization techniques, reducing the expertise barrier for practitioners. 2. Specialized Tooling and Infrastructure : The emergence of dedicated merging platforms and standardized interfaces will accelerate adoption and enable more sophisticated merging workflows. 3. Theoretical Maturation : As empirical understanding deepens, we expect the devel-opment of rigorous theoretical frameworks that provide guarantees about merged model behavior and enable principled design decisions. 4. Multimodal and Cross-Domain Merging : Techniques for combining models across modalities (text, vision, audio) and domains will unlock new capabilities for build-ing comprehensive AI assistants. 5. Safety and Alignment Integration : Merging frameworks will increasingly incorpo-rate safety constraints as first-class citizens, ensuring that capability enhancement does not compromise alignment properties. In conclusion, model merging represents a fundamental change in how we think about building and deploying large language models. Rather than training monolithic models from scratch for each application, the field is moving toward a compositional approach where specialized capabilities can be flexibly combined to meet diverse requirements. This survey has aimed to provide researchers and practitioners with a comprehensive foundation for understanding the current state of the art and contributing to the continued advancement of this transformative technology. 

## 8 Conclusion 

This survey has organized the rapidly expanding model merging landscape through a unified FUSE taxonomy—Foundations, Unification Strategies, Scenarios, and Ecosystem— covering the theoretical, algorithmic, practical, and infrastructural dimensions of the field. 43 Preprint. On the algorithmic front, we traced the evolution from simple weight averaging and Model Soups (Wortsman et al., 2022a) through task-vector arithmetic (Ilharco et al., 2023) and interference-aware methods such as TIES-Merging (Yadav et al., 2023), DARE (Yu et al., 2023), and DELLA (Deep et al., 2024), to adaptive strategies like AdaMerging (Yang et al., 2024d) and evolutionary optimization (Akiba et al., 2024). As summarized in Table 5, each family of methods navigates a fundamental trade-off between the simplicity of data-free merging and the accuracy of data-dependent or search-based strategies. On the theoretical side, we synthesized results from loss landscape geometry, linear mode connectivity (Singh & Jaggi, 2020), and permutation symmetry that collectively explain 

when and why merging succeeds. These insights are not merely explanatory: they directly inform practical algorithm design, as witnessed by the progression from na ¨ıve averaging to curvature-aware and sign-resolved merging. On the applications front, we surveyed how merging enables multi-task generalization, multilingual transfer, safety alignment, and federated learning—all at a fraction of the cost of full retraining. However, we also highlighted dual-use risks, evaluation gaps, and the absence of standardized benchmarks (He et al., 2025) as pressing concerns. Looking ahead, we identified scalability to frontier-scale models, cross-architecture and cross-modality merging, dynamic continual merging, and safety-preserving merge guaran-tees as the most impactful open problems. As the number of publicly available fine-tuned models continues to grow, principled merging techniques will become increasingly central to the AI practitioner’s toolkit. We hope this survey helps researchers and practitioners navigate this rapidly evolving field. 

## References 

Armen Aghajanyan, Sonal Gupta, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Intrinsic dimensionality explains the effectiveness of language model fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2021 , pp. 7319–7328, 2021. Samuel K. Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha S. Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models modulo permutation symmetries. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CQsmMYmlP5T .Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Op-tuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD 2019 , 2019. Takuya Akiba, Makoto Shing, Yujin Tang, Qi Sun, and David Ha. Evolutionary optimization of model merging recipes. CoRR , abs/2403.13187, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.13187. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.13187 .Roberto Alcover-Couso, Juan C. SanMiguel, Marcos Escudero-Vi ˜nolo, and Jose M. Martinez. Layer-wise model merging for unsupervised domain adaptation in segmentation tasks. 

CoRR , abs/2409.15813, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2409.15813. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2409.15813 .Rachit Bansal, Bidisha Samanta, Siddharth Dalmia, Nitish Gupta, Shikhar Vashishth, Sriram Ganapathy, Abhishek Bapna, Prateek Jain, and Partha Talukdar. LLM augmented llms: Expanding capabilities through composition. CoRR , abs/2401.02412, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ ARXIV.2401.02412. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.02412 .Xiao Bi, Deli Chen, Guanting Chen, Shanhuang Chen, Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Honghui Ding, Kai Dong, Qiushi Du, Zhe Fu, Huazuo Gao, Kaige Gao, Wenjun Gao, Ruiqi Ge, Kang Guan, Daya Guo, Jianzhong Guo, Guangbo Hao, Zhewen Hao, Ying He, Wenjie Hu, Panpan Huang, Erhang Li, Guowei Li, Jiashi Li, Yao Li, Y. K. Li, Wenfeng Liang, Fangyun Lin, Alex X. Liu, Bo Liu, Wen Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Xin Liu 0126, Yiyuan Liu, Haoyu Lu, Shanghao Lu, Fuli Luo, Shirong Ma, Xiaotao Nie, Tian Pei, Yishi Piao, Junjie 44 Preprint. Qiu, Hui Qu, Tongzheng Ren, Zehui Ren, Chong Ruan, Zhangli Sha, Zhihong Shao, Junxiao Song, Xuecheng Su, Jingxiang Sun, Yaofeng Sun, Minghui Tang, Bingxuan Wang, Peiyi Wang, Shiyu Wang, Yaohui Wang, Yongji Wang, Tong Wu, Y. Wu, Xin Xie, Zhenda Xie, Ziwei Xie, Yiliang Xiong, Hanwei Xu, R. X. Xu, Yanhong Xu, Dejian Yang, Yuxiang You, Shuiping Yu, Xingkai Yu, B. Zhang, Haowei Zhang, Lecong Zhang, Liyue Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Wentao Zhang, Yichao Zhang, Chenggang Zhao, Yao Zhao, Shangyan Zhou, Shunfeng Zhou, Qihao Zhu, and Yuheng Zou. Deepseek LLM: scaling open-source language models with longtermism. CoRR , abs/2401.02954, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2401.02954. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.02954 .Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual , 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/ hash/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html .Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pond ´e de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mo-hammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code. 

CoRR , abs/2107.03374, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374 .Alexandra Chronopoulou, Matthew E. Peters, Alexander Fraser, and Jesse Dodge. Adapter-soup: Weight averaging to improve generalization of pretrained language models. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023 , pp. 2009–2021, 2023. Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try ARC, the AI2 reasoning challenge. CoRR , abs/1803.05457, 2018. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. CoRR , abs/2110.14168, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168 .Thomas Coste, Usman Anwar, Robert Kirk, and David Krueger. Reward model ensembles help mitigate overoptimization. CoRR , abs/2310.02743, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2310. 02743. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.02743 .Pala Tej Deep, Rishabh Bhardwaj, and Soujanya Poria. Della-merging: Reducing interference in model merging through magnitude-based sampling. CoRR , abs/2406.11617, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.11617. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.11617 .DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-v2: A strong, economical, and efficient mixture-of-experts language model. CoRR , abs/2405.04434, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2405.04434. URL https: //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.04434 .45 Preprint. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Do-ran, and Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pp. 4171–4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/V1/N19-1423. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423 .Aladin Djuhera, Swanand Ravindra Kadhe, Farhan Ahmed, Syed Zawad, and Holger Giese. Safemerge: Preserving safety alignment in fine-tuned large language models via selective layer-wise model merging. CoRR , abs/2503.17239, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2503.17239. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.17239 .Shihan Dou, Enyu Zhou, Yan Liu, Songyang Gao, Wei Shen, Limao Xiong, Yuhao Zhou, Xiao Wang, Zhiheng Xi, Xiaoran Fan, Shiliang Pu, Jiang Zhu, Rui Zheng, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing Huang. Loramoe: Alleviating world knowledge forgetting in large language models via moe-style plugin. CoRR , abs/2312.09979, 2023. Felix Draxler, Kambis Voss, Fred A. Hamprecht, and Ullrich K ¨ othe. Essentially no barriers in neural network energy landscape. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: NeurIPS 2018 , pp. 7215–7226, 2018. Guodong Du, Junlin Lee, Jing Li, Runhua Jiang, Yifei Guo, Shuyang Yu, Hanting Liu, Sim Kuan Goh, Ho-Kin Tang, Daojing He, and Min Zhang. Parameter competition balancing for model merging. CoRR , abs/2410.02396, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2410. 02396. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.02396 .Rahim Entezari, Hanie Sedghi, Olga Saukh, and Behnam Neyshabur. The role of permuta-tion invariance in linear mode connectivity of neural networks. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022 , 2022. William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 23:120:1–120:39, 2022. URL https://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-0998.html .Wenfeng Feng, Chuzhan Hao, Yuewei Zhang, Yu Han, and Hao Wang. Mixture-of-loras: An efficient multitask tuning for large language models. CoRR , abs/2403.03432, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.03432. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.06998 .Damien Ferbach, Baptiste Goujaud, Gauthier Gidel, and Aymeric Dieuleveut. Proving linear mode connectivity of neural networks via optimal transport. In Sanjoy Dasgupta, Stephan Mandt, and Yingzhen Li (eds.), International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2-4 May 2024, Palau de Congressos, Valencia, Spain , volume 238 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 3853–3861. PMLR, 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v238/ferbach24a.html .Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural networks. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019 . OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=rJl-b3RcF7 .Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel M. Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear mode connectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020 , volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 3259–3269. PMLR, 2020. Zichuan Fu, Xian Wu, Guojing Li, Yingying Zhang, Yefeng Zheng, Tianshi Ming, Yejing Wang, Wanyu Wang, and Xiangyu Zhao. Model merging for knowledge editing. CoRR ,abs/2506.12384, 2025. Timur Garipov, Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Dmitry P. Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Loss surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns. In Samy Bengio, 46 Preprint. Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicol `o Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montr´ eal, Canada , pp. 8803–8812, 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/ be3087e74e9100d4bc4c6268cdbe8456-Abstract.html .Charles Goddard, Shamane Siriwardhana, Malikeh Ehghaghi, Luke Meyers, Vlad Karpukhin, Brian Benedict, Mark McQuade, and Jacob Solawetz. Arcee’s mergekit: A toolkit for merging large language models. CoRR , abs/2403.13257, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.13257. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.13257 .Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Umberto Michieli, Fabio Pizzati, Philip Torr, Adel Bibi, Bernard Ghanem, and Mete Ozay. Model merging and safety alignment: One bad model spoils the bunch. In Findings of EMNLP 2024 , pp. 13033–13046, 2024. Yifei He, Yuzheng Hu, Yong Lin, Tong Zhang, and Han Zhao. Localize-and-stitch: Efficient model merging via sparse task arithmetic. CoRR , abs/2408.13656, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ ARXIV.2408.13656. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.17931 .Yifei He, Siqi Zeng, Yuzheng Hu, Rui Yang, Tong Zhang, and Han Zhao. Mergebench: A benchmark for merging domain-specialized llms. CoRR , abs/2505.10833, 2025. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021 . OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=d7KBjmI3GmQ .Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. CoRR , abs/1503.02531, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531 .Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 . OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nZeVKeeFYf9 .Hangrui Hu, Xinfa Zhu, Ting He, Dake Guo, Bin Zhang, Xiong Wang, Zhifang Guo, Ziyue Jiang, Hongkun Hao, Zishan Guo, Xinyu Zhang, Pei Zhang, Baosong Yang, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen technical report. CoRR , abs/2309.16609, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2309.16609. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.16609 .Yedi Hu, Yunzhi Yao, Ningyu Zhang, Shumin Deng, and Huajun Chen. Exploring model kinship for merging large language models. CoRR , abs/2410.12613, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ ARXIV.2410.12613. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.12613 .Chengsong Huang, Qian Liu, Bill Yuchen Lin, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, and Min Lin. Lorahub: Efficient cross-task generalization via dynamic lora composition. CoRR , abs/2307.13269, 2023a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2307.13269. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307. 13269 .Chenyu Huang, Peng Ye, Tao Chen, Tong He, Xiangyu Yue, and Wanli Ouyang. EMR-Merging: Tuning-free high-performance model merging. In NeurIPS , 2024. Shih-Cheng Huang, Pin-Zu Li, Yu-Chi Hsu, Kuang-Ming Chen, Yu Tung Lin, Shih-Kai Hsiao, Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, and Hung-yi Lee. Chat vector: A simple approach to equip llms with instruction following and model alignment in new languages. CoRR ,abs/2310.04799, 2023b. Gabriel Ilharco, Marco T ´ulio Ribeiro, Mitchell Wortsman, Ludwig Schmidt, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi. Editing models with task arithmetic. In The Eleventh Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 .OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6t0Kwf8-jrj .47 Preprint. Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Timur Garipov, Dmitry P. Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Averaging weights leads to wider optima and better generalization. In Amir Globerson and Ricardo Silva (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Conference on Uncer-tainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2018, Monterey, California, USA, August 6-10, 2018 , pp. 876–885. AUAI Press, 2018. URL http://auai.org/uai2018/proceedings/papers/313. pdf .Dong-Hwan Jang, Sangdoo Yun, and Dongyoon Han. Model stock: All we need is just a few fine-tuned models. CoRR , abs/2403.19522, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.19522. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.19522 .Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, L ´elio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas J. Wang, Timoth ´ee Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b. 

CoRR , abs/2310.06825, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2310.06825. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2310.06825 .Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de Las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, L ´elio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao, Th ´eophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timoth ´ee Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mixtral of experts. CoRR , abs/2401.04088, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2401.04088. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.04088 .Xisen Jin, Xiang Ren, Daniel Preotiuc-Pietro, and Pengxiang Cheng. Dataless knowledge fusion by merging weights of language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FCnohuR6AnM .Keller Jordan, Hanie Sedghi, Olga Saukh, Rahim Entezari, and Behnam Neyshabur. REPAIR: renormalizing permuted activations for interpolation repair. CoRR , abs/2211.08403, 2022. Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Peter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017 , 2017. Dahyun Kim, Chanjun Park, Sanghoon Kim, Wonsung Lee, Wonho Song, Yunsu Kim, Hyeonwoo Kim, Yungi Kim, Hyeonju Lee, Jihoo Kim, Changbae Ahn, Seonghoon Yang, Sukyung Lee, Hyunbyung Park, Gyoungjin Gim, Mikyoung Cha, Hwalsuk Lee, and Sunghun Kim. SOLAR 10.7b: Scaling large language models with simple yet effective depth up-scaling. CoRR , abs/2312.15166, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2312.15166. URL 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.15166 .James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A. Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. CoRR , abs/1612.00796, 2016. URL http: //arxiv.org/abs/1612.00796 .Margaret Li, Suchin Gururangan, Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Tim Althoff, Noah A. Smith, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Branch-train-merge: Embarrassingly parallel training of expert language models. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Federated Learning for Natural Language Processing, FL4NLP 2022 , 2022. Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 2020, MLSys 2020 , 2020. Weishi Li, Yong Peng, Miao Zhang, Liang Ding, Han Hu, and Li Shen. Deep model fusion: A survey. CoRR , abs/2309.15698, 2023a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2309.15698. URL 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.15698 .48 Preprint. Yuanzhi Li, S ´ebastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee. Textbooks are all you need II: phi-1.5 technical report. CoRR , abs/2309.05463, 2023b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2309.05463. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.05463 .Yunshui Li, Yiyuan Ma, Shen Yan, Chaoyi Zhang, Jing Liu, Jianqiao Lu, Ziwen Xu, Mengzhao Chen, Minrui Wang, Shiyi Zhan, Jin Ma, Xunhao Lai, Deyi Liu, Yao Luo, Xingyan Bin, Hongbin Ren, Mingji Han, Wenhao Hao, Bairen Yi, LingJun Liu, Bole Ma, Xiaoying Jia, Xun Zhou, Siyuan Qiao, Liang Xiang, and Yonghui Wu. Model merging in pre-training of large language models. CoRR , abs/2505.12082, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2505.12082. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.12082 .Yushu Liang, Zhenchao Ma, Renze Lou, et al. Mix data or merge models? balancing the helpfulness, honesty, and harmlessness of LLM via model merging. CoRR , abs/2502.06876, 2025. Bin Lin, Zhenyu Tang, Yang Ye, Jiaxi Cui, Bin Zhu, Peng Jin, Jinfa Huang, Junwu Zhang, Munan Ning, and Li Yuan. Moe-llava: Mixture of experts for large vision-language models. CoRR , abs/2401.15947, 2024. Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022 ,pp. 3214–3252. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. doi: 10.18653/V1/2022. ACL-LONG.229. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.229 .Zhenyi Lu, Chenghao Fan, Wei Wei, Xiaoye Qu, Dangyang Chen, and Yu Cheng. Twin-merging: Dynamic integration of modular expertise in model merging. CoRR ,abs/2406.15479, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.15479. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2406.15479 .Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Eric J. Bigelow, Robert P. Dick, David Scott Krueger, and Hidenori Tanaka. Mechanistic mode connectivity. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Con-ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 22965–23004. PMLR, 2023. URL 

https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/lubana23a.html .Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jianguang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng, Qingwei Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. Wizardmath: Empowering mathematical reasoning for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct. CoRR ,abs/2308.09583, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2308.09583. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2308.09583 .Michael Matena and Colin Raffel. Merging models with fisher-weighted averaging. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural In-formation Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022 , 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper files/paper/2022/hash/ 70c26937fbf3d4600b69a129031b66ec-Abstract-Conference.html .Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Ag ¨uera y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Aarti Singh and Xiaojin (Jerry) Zhu (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2017, 20-22 April 2017, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA ,volume 54 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017. URL 

http://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/mcmahan17a.html .Mohammed Muqeeth, Haokun Liu, and Colin Raffel. Soft merging of experts with adaptive routing. CoRR , abs/2306.03745, 2023. Mohammed Muqeeth, Haokun Liu, Yufan Liu, and Colin Raffel. Learning to route among specialized experts for zero-shot generalization. In ICML , pp. 36829–36846, 2024. 49 Preprint. Behnam Neyshabur, Hanie Sedghi, and Chiyuan Zhang. What is being transferred in transfer learning? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: NeurIPS 2020 ,pp. 512–523, 2020. Amin Heyrani Nobari, Kaveh Alimohammadi, Ali ArjomandBigdeli, Akash Srivastava, Faez Ahmed, and Navid Azizan. Activation-informed merging of large language models. 

CoRR , abs/2502.02421, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2502.02421. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2502.02421 .Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In NeurIPS , 2022. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language su-pervision. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event , vol-ume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. URL 

http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.html .Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D. Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, De-cember 10 - 16, 2023 , 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper files/paper/2023/hash/ a85b405ed65c6477a4fe8302b5e06ce7-Abstract-Conference.html .Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 21:140:1–140:67, 2020. URL https: //jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html .Alexandre Ram’e, Kartik Ahuja, Jianyu Zhang, Matthieu Cord, L’eon Bottou, and David Lopez-Paz. Model ratatouille: Recycling diverse models for out-of-distribution general-ization. In ICML , pp. 28656–28679, 2023a. Alexandre Ram’e, Guillaume Couairon, Corentin Dancette, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Mustafa Shukor, Laure Soulier, and Matthieu Cord. Rewarded soups: Towards pareto-optimal alignment by interpolating weights fine-tuned on diverse rewards. CoRR , abs/2306.04488, 2023b. Alexandre Ram’e, Nino Vieillard, L’eonard Hussenot, Robert Dadashi, Geoffrey Cideron, Olivier Bachem, and Johan Ferret. WARM: on the benefits of weight averaged reward models. In ICML 2024 , 2024. Jie Ren, Pin-Yu Chen, and Ren Wang. Revisiting mode connectivity in neural networks with bezier surface. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025 . OpenReview.net, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=1NevL7zdHS .Baptiste Rozi `ere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, J ´er ´emy Rapin, Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Evtimov, Joanna Bitton, Manish Bhatt, Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong, Alexandre D ´efossez, Jade Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Nicolas Usunier, Thomas Scialom, and Gabriel Synnaeve. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. CoRR , abs/2308.12950, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2308.12950. URL https: //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.12950 .Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An adversarial winograd schema challenge at scale. In AAAI 2020 , pp. 8732–8740, 2020. 50 Preprint. Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc V. Le, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings . OpenReview.net, 2017. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1ckMDqlg .Sidak Pal Singh and Martin Jaggi. Model fusion via optimal transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: NeurIPS 2020 , pp. 22045–22055, 2020. Sidak Pal Singh, Linara Adilova, Michael Kamp, Asja Fischer, Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf, and Thomas Hofmann. Landscaping linear mode connectivity. CoRR , abs/2406.16300, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.16300. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.16300 .George Stoica, Daniel Bolya, Jakob Bjorner, Pratik Ramesh, Taylor Hearn, and Judy Hoffman. Zipit! merging models from different tasks without training. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023 , 2023. Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Olga Golovneva, Vasu Sharma, Hu Xu, Xi Victoria Lin, Baptiste Rozi `ere, Jacob Kahn, Daniel Li, Wen-tau Yih, Jason Weston, and Xian Li. Branch-train-mix: Mixing expert llms into a mixture-of-experts LLM. CoRR , abs/2403.07816, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.07816. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.07816 .Anke Tang, Li Shen, Yong Luo, Han Hu, Bo Du, and Yixin Chen. Fusionbench: A compre-hensive benchmark of deep model fusion. CoRR , abs/2406.03280, 2024a. Anke Tang, Li Shen, Yong Luo, Han Hu, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Fusionbench: A comprehensive benchmark of deep model fusion. CoRR , abs/2406.03280, 2024b. Anke Tang, Li Shen, Yong Luo, Nan Yin, Lefei Zhang, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Parameter efficient multi-task model fusion with partial linearization. In ICLR 2024 , 2024c. Anke Tang, Li Shen, Enneng Yang, Guibing Guo, Yong Luo, Lefei Zhang, Xiaochun Cao, and Dacheng Tao. Merging multi-task models via weight-ensembling mixture of experts. In ICML 2024 , pp. 44960–44978, 2024d. Gemma Team. Gemma: Open models based on gemini research and technology. CoRR ,abs/2403.08295, 2024a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.08295. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2403.08295 .Llama Team. The llama 3 herd of models. CoRR , abs/2407.21783, 2024b. doi: 10.48550/ ARXIV.2407.21783. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.21783 .Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth ´ee Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi `ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aur ´elien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. CoRR , abs/2302.13971, 2023a. doi: 10.48550/ ARXIV.2302.13971. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971 .Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aur ´elien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. CoRR , abs/2307.09288, 2023b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2307.09288. URL https: //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288 .51 Preprint. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA , pp. 5998–6008, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/ 3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html .Fanqi Wan, Xinting Huang, Deng Cai, Xiaojun Quan, Wei Bi, and Shuming Shi. Knowledge fusion of large language models. In ICLR 2024 , 2024a. Fanqi Wan, Ziyi Yang, Longguang Zhong, Xiaojun Quan, Xinting Huang, and Wei Bi. Knowledge fusion of chat llms: A preliminary technical report. CoRR , abs/2402.16107, 2024b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2402.16107. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406. 04692 .Hongyi Wang, Mikhail Yurochkin, Yuekai Sun, Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos, and Yasaman Khazaeni. Federated learning with matched averaging. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020 , 2020. Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , 2022. Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Ari S. Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, and Ludwig Schmidt. Model soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without increasing inference time. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesv ´ari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA ,volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 23965–23998. PMLR, 2022a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wortsman22a.html .Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Mike Li, Jong Wook Kim, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, and Ludwig Schmidt. Robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models. In CVPR , pp. 7949–7961, 2022b. Xun Wu, Shaohan Huang, and Furu Wei. Mixture of lora experts. CoRR , abs/2404.13628, 2024. Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, and Xingrun Xing. Lm-cocktail: Resilient tuning of language models via model merging. CoRR , abs/2311.13534, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV. 2311.13534. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2311.13534 .Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large pre-trained language models to follow complex instructions. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net, 2024. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=CfXh93NDgH .Prateek Yadav, Derek Tam, Leshem Choshen, Colin A. Raffel, and Mohit Bansal. Ties-merging: Resolving interference when merging models. In Alice Oh, Tristan Nau-mann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural In-formation Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, Decem-ber 10 - 16, 2023 , 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper files/paper/2023/hash/ 1644c9af28ab7916874f6fd6228a9bcf-Abstract-Conference.html .Prateek Yadav, Colin Raffel, Mohammed Muqeeth, Lucas Caccia, Haokun Liu, Tianlong Chen, Mohit Bansal, Leshem Choshen, and Alessandro Sordoni. A survey on model moerging: Recycling and routing among specialized experts for collaborative learning. 52 Preprint. 

CoRR , abs/2408.07057, 2024a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2408.07057. URL https://doi.org/ 10.48550/arXiv.2408.07057 .Prateek Yadav, Derek Tam, Leshem Choshen, Colin Raffel, and Mohit Bansal. Model breadcrumbs: Scaling multi-task model merging with sparse masks. In ECCV 2024 , pp. 270–287, 2024b. An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jialin Wang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Ma, Jianxin Yang, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, Jinze Bai, Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Chen, Kexin Yang, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Na Ni, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Ru Peng, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Runji Lin, Shijie Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Tianhang Zhu, Tianhao Li, Tianyu Liu, Wenbin Ge, Xiaodong Deng, Xiaohuan Zhou, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Zhang, Xipin Wei, Xuancheng Ren, Xuejing Liu, Yang Fan, Yang Yao, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yunfei Chu, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhifang Guo, and Zhihao Fan. Qwen2 technical report. CoRR , abs/2407.10671, 2024a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2407.10671. URL 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.10671 .Enneng Yang, Li Shen, Guibing Guo, Xingwei Wang, Xiaochun Cao, Jie Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. Model merging in llms, mllms, and beyond: Methods, theories, applications and opportunities. CoRR , abs/2408.07666, 2024b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2408.07666. URL 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.07666 .Enneng Yang, Li Shen, Zhenyi Wang, Guibing Guo, Xiaojun Chen, Xingwei Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Representation surgery for multi-task model merging. In ICML , pp. 56332– 56356, 2024c. Enneng Yang, Zhenyi Wang, Li Shen, Shiwei Liu, Guibing Guo, Xingwei Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Adamerging: Adaptive model merging for multi-task learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024 , 2024d. Le Yu, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Language models are super mario: Absorbing abilities from homologous models as a free lunch. CoRR ,abs/2311.03099, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2311.03099. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2311.03099 .Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence? In Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers , pp. 4791–4800. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/V1/P19-1472. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/p19-1472 .Shenghe Zheng and Hongzhi Wang. FREE-Merging: fourier transform for efficient model merging. In ICCV 2025 , 2025. 53