Title: Soft Tournament Equilibrium

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.04328v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 01:19:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
# SOFT TOURNAMENT EQUILIBRIUM 

Saad Alqithami 

alqithami@gmail.com 

# ABSTRACT 

The evaluation of general-purpose artificial agents, particularly those based on large language models, presents a significant challenge due to the non-transitive nature of their interactions. When agent A

defeats B, B defeats C, and C defeats A, traditional ranking methods that force a linear ordering can be misleading and unstable. We argue that for such cyclic domains, the fundamental object of evaluation should not be a ranking but a set-valued core, as conceptualized in classical tournament theory. This paper introduces Soft Tournament Equilibrium (STE), a differentiable framework for learning and computing set-valued tournament solutions directly from pairwise comparison data. STE first learns a probabilistic tournament model, potentially conditioned on rich contextual information. It then employs novel, differentiable operators for soft reachability and soft covering to compute continuous analogues of two seminal tournament solutions: the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set .The output is a set of core agents, each with a calibrated membership score, providing a nuanced and robust assessment of agent capabilities. We develop the theoretical foundation for STE to prove its consistency with classical solutions in the zero-temperature limit, which establishes its Condorcet-inclusion properties, and analyzing its stability and sample complexity. We specify an experimental protocol for validating STE on both synthetic and real-world benchmarks. This work aims to provide a complete, standalone treatise that re-centers general-agent evaluation on a more appropriate and robust theoretical foundation, moving from unstable rankings to stable, set-valued equilibria. 

Keywords Agent Evaluation ┬Ę Tournament Solutions ┬Ę Top Cycle ┬Ę Uncovered Set ┬Ę Non-Transitivity ┬Ę Differentiable Optimization ┬Ę Computational Social Choice ┬Ę Large Language Models. 

# 1 Introduction 

The rapid advancement of artificial intelligence has led to the development of general-purpose agents, often powered by large language models (LLMs), capable of performing a wide array of tasks in complex, interactive environments [Park et al., 2023, Li et al., 2024]. Evaluating these agents is a critical and formidable challenge. Unlike narrow AI systems, whose performance can be measured on a single, well-defined metric, general agents operate in heterogeneous domains where their effectiveness depends on the specific task, the context, and the other agents they interact with. This heterogeneity frequently gives rise to non-transitive, or cyclic, performance relationships [Chiang et al., 2024, Zheng et al., 2024]. For instance, agent A might be superior to agent B in coding tasks, agent B might excel over agent C in creative writing, and agent C might outperform agent A in logical reasoning. Such a cycle, where A Ōē╗ B Ōē╗ C Ōē╗ A,cannot be faithfully represented by a single linear ranking. Traditional evaluation methods, which are often rooted in rank aggregation or rating systems, are fundamentally designed to produce a total order. Methods like Kemeny-Young ranking [Kemeny, 1959, Young, 1974], while axiomatically sound in a ranking context, are forced to break cycles, leading to a loss of information and potential instability. A small change in the data can lead to a completely different consensus ranking. Modern rating systems like Elo [Elo, 1978] and TrueSkill [Herbrich et al., 2006], as well as pairwise probability models like Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) [Bradley and Terry, 1952, Luce, 1959], presuppose an underlying latent strength or skill parameter for each agent, which inherently assumes transitivity. When confronted with cycles, these models may produce rankings that are misleading or fail to converge properly. We argue that for domains characterized by non-transitivity, the very object of inference needs to be reconsidered. Instead of asking, ŌĆ£What is the best ranking of these agents?ŌĆØ, we should ask, ŌĆ£Which agents belong to the undominated 

> arXiv:2604.04328v1 [cs.AI] 6 Apr 2026

STE core?ŌĆØ. This question is the central focus of tournament theory, a branch of social choice theory that has developed a rich collection of tournament solutions for selecting a subset of alternatives from a tournament graph [Brandt et al., 2016, Laslier, 1997]. These solutions, such as the Top Cycle [Good, 1971, Miller, 1980] and the Uncovered Set [Fishburn, 1977, Miller, 1980], are designed to handle cycles gracefully and provide axiomatically justified set-valued outputs. However, classical tournament solutions are defined on deterministic tournament graphs and are not directly applicable to the noisy, probabilistic, and often context-dependent data that arises from agent evaluation. There is a need for a framework that can bridge the gap between the rich theoretical foundations of tournament theory and the practical realities of modern agent evaluation. This paper introduces Soft Tournament Equilibrium (STE) to fill this void. STE is a complete, end-to-end differentiable framework that learns set-valued tournament solutions from pairwise comparison data. It consists of two main components. First, a probabilistic tournament learner that fits a flexible, context-conditioned model of pairwise win probabilities, such as a BTL model with neural network-based score functions. This allows it to capture complex dependencies on task features and opponent identities. Second, differentiable tournament solution operators that introduce novel, differentiable operators for computing soft versions of the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set. These operators are based on smooth approximations of graph reachability and covering relations, using techniques from differentiable combinatorics like the log-sum-exp trick [Berthet et al., 2020]. The output is not a binary in/out decision but a continuous membership score for each agent in the core, which can be interpreted as a probability of belonging to the undominated set. Because the entire pipeline is differentiable, STE can be trained end-to-end to optimize not just the predictive accuracy of the pairwise model but also the properties of the resulting core, such as its sharpness or calibration. This work provides a comprehensive treatment of STE, including its theoretical underpinnings, practical implementation, and a thorough experimental protocol for its validation. 

1.1 Contributions 

This paper makes several key contributions. We propose a fundamental shift in the object of agent evaluation, from rankings to set-valued cores, arguing that this is a more robust and faithful representation of agent capabilities in non-transitive domains. We develop novel, differentiable operators for computing the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set, based on soft reachability and soft covering. These operators are the core technical innovation of this work and are of independent interest for applications of social choice theory in machine learning. We provide a rigorous theoretical analysis of STE, proving that our soft operators are consistent and converge to their classical counterparts as a temperature parameter goes to zero. We establish Condorcet-inclusion properties, analyze the stability of the framework, and provide a sample complexity analysis. We present STE as a practical, end-to-end trainable system with detailed algorithms, implementation details, and computational complexity analysis. The framework is flexible and can be adapted to various data settings and model architectures. We conduct an extensive review of related work, covering rank aggregation, pairwise probability models, spectral methods, classical tournament theory, differentiable combinatorics, and LLM agent evaluation. We explicitly delineate the novelty of STE and contrast it with existing approaches through a detailed novelty audit. Finally, we specify a comprehensive experimental protocol for validating STE, including synthetic and real-world benchmarks, a wide range of baselines, and a suite of metrics for evaluating performance, stability, and robustness. This paper is intended to be a complete, standalone resource on Soft Tournament Equilibrium. We aim to provide not just a description of a new method but a thorough exposition of the problem, the relevant background, the proposed solution, its theoretical properties, and a clear path to its empirical validation. Our hope is that STE will provide a new and valuable tool for the rigorous and nuanced evaluation of general-purpose AI agents. 

1.2 Roadmap 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a comprehensive review of related work, covering tournament theory, rank aggregation, pairwise probability models, spectral methods, differentiable combinatorics, and LLM evaluation. Section 3 presents the STE framework in detail, including the probabilistic tournament model, the soft tournament construction, and the differentiable operators for the Top Cycle and Uncovered Set. Section 4 provides a rigorous theoretical analysis, proving consistency, Condorcet-inclusion, stability, and sample complexity results. Section 5 specifies a detailed experimental protocol for validating STE. Section 6 discusses implementation details, computational considerations, and practical guidelines. Section 7 concludes with a summary of our contributions and directions for future work. The appendices contain additional technical details, extended proofs, and supplementary material. 2STE 

# 2 Background and Related Work 

To properly situate Soft Tournament Equilibrium, we provide a detailed review of several related fields. We begin with a deeper dive into classical tournament solutions, which form the conceptual foundation of our work. We then discuss existing approaches to ranking and rating from pairwise comparisons, highlighting their limitations in the presence of cycles. We also review spectral methods, which offer a different perspective on ranking in graphs. Finally, we cover the recent advances in differentiable combinatorics and LLM agent evaluation that provide the technical and motivational context for STE. A summary of how STE contrasts with these related areas is provided in Table 1. Table 1: Novelty Audit: STE vs. Related Frameworks                   

> Framework Primary Object Core Contribution of STE Key Distinctions
> Classical Tournament Solutions Set-valued cores Differentiable, probabilistic, context-aware Handles noisy data; end-to-end trainable Rank Aggregation (e.g., Kemeny) Total ordering (ranking) Rejects ranking for cores; avoids NP-hardness Embraces cycles, does not break them; computationally tractable Rating Systems (e.g., Elo, BTL) Scalar ratings (implies ranking) No transitivity assumption; set-valued output Robust to cycles; identifies tiers, not just a single hierarchy Spectral Methods (e.g., PageRank) Scalar centrality scores (ranking) Computes axiomatically-defined cores Output is a set, not a scalar; grounded in social choice theory Differentiable Ranking (e.g., SCO) Differentiable total ordering Fundamentally different output object (core) Does not force a linear order; designed for non-transitivity

2.1 Tournament Theory and Social Choice 

A tournament is a directed graph representing the outcomes of a round-robin competition. In the context of social choice, the nodes are alternatives (or agents), and a directed edge from a to b (a Ōē╗ b) means that a is preferred to b.A central problem in tournament theory is to define a choice function or tournament solution that selects a subset of winning alternatives from any given tournament [Brandt et al., 2016]. This problem is non-trivial because tournaments can contain cycles. The simplest cycle is a 3-cycle, where A Ōē╗ B,

B Ōē╗ C, and C Ōē╗ A. In such cases, there is no single best alternative. Tournament solutions are designed to identify a set of plausible winners in a principled, axiomatically justified manner. 

2.1.1 The Top Cycle (Smith/Schwartz Set) 

The Top Cycle, also known as the Smith set [Good, 1971] or the Schwartz set [Schwartz, 1990], is one of the most important tournament solutions. It is based on the notion of dominance and reachability. An agent a dominates a set of agents S if a beats every agent in S. A set of agents C is a dominant set if every agent in C dominates every agent not in C. An agent a can reach an agent b if there is a directed path from a to b in the tournament graph. The Top Cycle, denoted TC( T ), is the smallest non-empty set of agents C ŌŖå A such that every agent in C can reach every agent in A. Equivalently, it is the set of all agents that can reach every other agent in the tournament. It is also the smallest dominant set. The Top Cycle is always non-empty and unique. It consists of a single initial strongly connected component of the tournament graph, plus all the components reachable from it. If a Condorcet winner exists (an agent that beats all other agents), the Top Cycle consists of only that agent. The Top Cycle satisfies many desirable properties, including Condorcet consistency, monotonicity, and composition consistency [Laffond et al., 1996, Brandt et al., 2023]. 

2.1.2 The Uncovered Set 

The Uncovered Set is a refinement of the Top Cycle, meaning it is always a subset of the Top Cycle. It is based on the covering relation, which is a stronger form of dominance. An agent c covers an agent a if ( c Ōē╗ a) and (for every agent b

that a beats, c also beats b). In other words, c covers a if c is strictly better than a in a strong sense: it beats a directly, and it also beats every agent that a can beat. An agent that is covered is outclassed by its coverer. The Uncovered Set, denoted UC( T ), is the set of all agents that are not covered by any other agent in the tournament [Miller, 1980, Fishburn, 1977]. The Uncovered Set is also always non-empty and is contained within the Top Cycle. It provides a more discerning selection of winners. Like the Top Cycle, it contains a Condorcet winner if one exists. The Uncovered Set has been axiomatically characterized and plays a significant role in game theory and political science [Moulin, 1986]. 

2.1.3 Other Tournament Solutions 

Several other tournament solutions have been proposed, such as the Banks set [Banks, 1985], the Copeland set, and the Minimal Covering Set. These solutions offer different trade-offs between refinement and computational complexity. Our work focuses on the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set because they are arguably the most fundamental and well-studied solutions, and they lend themselves well to differentiable approximation. 3STE Despite their theoretical appeal, classical tournament solutions have seen limited application in machine learning and agent evaluation. This is primarily because they are defined on deterministic graphs, whereas real-world comparison data is noisy and probabilistic. STE is the first framework to bridge this gap by developing differentiable analogues of these solutions. Table 2 provides a comparison of the key properties of these classical solutions. Table 2: Comparison of Classical Tournament Solutions                         

> Solution Core Idea Condorcet Winner Complexity Key Property
> Top Cycle (TC) Smallest dominant set Always selected O(n2)Most stable, but can be large Uncovered Set (UC) Agents not outclassed Always selected O(n3)Superset of all game-theoretic solutions Banks Set (BA) Maximal elements of maximal transitive subsets Always selected NP-hard Can be disjoint, non-monotonic Copeland Set (CO) Agents with max number of wins Always selected O(n2)Simple, but can be large and miss nuances Minimal Covering Set (MC) Smallest set that covers all others Always selected O(n4)Refinement of UC, but complex

2.2 Rank Aggregation and Rating Systems 

Existing methods for learning from pairwise comparisons can be broadly categorized into rank aggregation methods and rating systems. 

2.2.1 Rank Aggregation 

Rank aggregation aims to find a single ranking that best represents a collection of individual rankings or pairwise preferences. The most famous method is the Kemeny-Young rule [Kemeny, 1959, Young, 1974], which seeks the ranking ŽĆ that minimizes the sum of Kendall-tau distances to the input votes. The Kendall-tau distance between two rankings is the number of pairs of items that are in a different order. Kemeny-Young is Condorcet-consistent and has strong axiomatic support, but it is NP-hard to compute exactly [Bartholdi III et al., 1989]. Practical algorithms often rely on heuristics, integer programming [Yoo and Escobedo, 2021, Rico et al., 2023], or approximation algorithms [Dwork et al., 2001]. Recent work has focused on making rank aggregation differentiable. Blondel et al. [Blondel et al., 2020] proposed a differentiable sorting operator based on optimal transport, which can be used to learn rankings in an end-to-end fashion. Lanctot et al. [Lanctot et al., 2024] introduced Soft Condorcet Optimization (SCO), which minimizes a differentiable loss function that encourages the learned ranking to satisfy the Condorcet criterion on the training data. Crucially, SCO optimizes a ranking loss to be Condorcet-friendly; STE, in contrast, optimizes a core via soft reachability and covering, as such, its normative object is a set, not a ranking. All of these methods, whether classical or differentiable, are fundamentally about finding a ranking. They treat cycles as noise to be averaged out or as inconsistencies to be minimized. STE, in contrast, treats cycles as a core structural feature of the data and outputs a set-valued core, which is a fundamentally different kind of object. 

2.2.2 Rating Systems and Pairwise Probability Models 

Another major line of work involves fitting probabilistic models to pairwise comparison data. The Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model [Bradley and Terry, 1952, Luce, 1959] is a cornerstone of this approach. It assigns a latent strength or skill parameter ╬╗i to each agent i and models the probability of i beating j as P(i Ōē╗ j) = e╬╗i /(e╬╗i + e╬╗j ) = Žā(╬╗i ŌłÆ ╬╗j ).This model can be fit using maximum likelihood estimation [Hunter, 2004]. The Elo rating system [Elo, 1978] and its Bayesian generalization, TrueSkill [Herbrich et al., 2006], are dynamic versions of the BTL model that update agent ratings after each interaction. These systems are widely used in online gaming and sports. The core assumption of BTL and related models is that there is an underlying one-dimensional latent skill that explains the pairwise outcomes. This assumption implies transitivity. If A is stronger than B, and B is stronger than C, then A

must be stronger than C. These models cannot represent cycles. When fit to cyclic data, they will produce a best-fit transitive approximation, which may not be a good representation of the underlying dynamics. STE makes no such transitivity assumption. It learns a full probabilistic tournament matrix P without assuming it is generated by a latent skill model, and then analyzes the structure of this tournament, cycles and all. 

2.3 Spectral, Markov, and Hodge-Theoretic Methods 

A third class of methods uses techniques from linear algebra and graph theory to rank items from pairwise comparisons. Spectral methods, such as Rank Centrality [Negahban et al., 2017], model the pairwise comparison data as a random walk on the graph of agents. The stationary distribution of this random walk gives a score for each agent, and these 4STE scores are used to produce a ranking. The intuition is that an agent is highly ranked if it is beaten by other highly ranked agents. Hodge-theoretic methods, such as HodgeRank [Jiang et al., 2011], use tools from algebraic topology to decompose the pairwise comparison data into a transitive (gradient) component and a cyclic (harmonic) component. The transitive component corresponds to a global ranking, while the cyclic component captures the degree of non-transitivity in the data. HodgeRank then uses the transitive component to produce a ranking. While these methods are more sophisticated in their handling of cycles than simple rating systems, their ultimate goal is still to produce a ranking. They either use the cyclic structure to inform the ranking (as in Rank Centrality) or explicitly separate it out and discard it (as in HodgeRank). STE, by contrast, takes the cyclic structure as the primary object of interest and uses it to compute a set-valued core. 

2.4 Differentiable Combinatorics and Smooth Operators 

The technical machinery of STE relies on recent advances in differentiable combinatorics. This field seeks to create continuous, differentiable analogues of discrete combinatorial operations, allowing them to be embedded in deep learning models and trained with gradient descent. Key techniques include the Gumbel-Softmax trick [Jang et al., 2017, Maddison et al., 2017], which provides a differentiable way to sample from a categorical distribution; the log-sum-exp (LSE) function, LSE( x1, . . . , x n) = log P 

> i

exi , which provides a smooth approximation to the maximum function (its dual, the softmin, is a smooth approximation to the minimum); Sinkhorn iteration [Cuturi, 2013], which provides a differentiable algorithm for solving regularized optimal transport problems, enabling differentiable sorting and ranking [Blondel et al., 2020]; and perturbed optimizers [Berthet et al., 2020], which provide a general framework for differentiating through the solution of an optimization problem. STE uses the softmin/LSE trick to create differentiable versions of graph reachability and covering relations. For example, the existence of a path can be framed as a maximum over all possible paths. By replacing the hard maximum with a soft maximum (LSE), we obtain a differentiable measure of reachability. While the use of LSE is standard, its application to approximate tournament solutions is novel to our work. 

2.5 LLM and General-Agent Evaluation 

The motivation for STE is rooted in the challenges of evaluating modern AI agents. The Chatbot Arena [Chiang et al., 2024] is a prominent example of an evaluation platform that relies on pairwise comparisons. It uses an Elo-based system to rank LLMs based on crowdsourced human preferences. While effective, this approach inherits the limitations of rating systems, namely the assumption of transitivity. Other benchmarks like AgentBench [Liu et al., 2024] and Mobile-Bench [Deng et al., 2024] evaluate agents on a suite of tasks, but the final aggregation of scores often relies on simple averaging, which can obscure important non-transitive interactions. The field of LLM agent evaluation is rapidly evolving [Mohammadi et al., 2025], with a growing recognition of the need for more nuanced and robust evaluation methodologies. STE provides a concrete, theoretically grounded proposal for how to move beyond simple rankings. 

2.6 Novelty Boundary and Explicit Contrasts 

To summarize and crystallize the contributions of this work, Table 3 provides a detailed novelty audit, contrasting STE with the main classes of related work. The fundamental distinction lies in the normative object of inference. STE is not another way to compute a ranking; it is a way to compute a fundamentally different object, a set-valued core, that is better suited to the non-transitive realities of multi-agent interaction. 

# 3 Preliminaries and Notation 

Before presenting the STE framework, we establish the necessary notation and formal definitions. This section introduces the mathematical objects we will work with: agents, contexts, probabilistic tournaments, and classical tournament solutions. 5STE Table 3: Extended novelty audit: Detailed comparison of STE with existing approaches. 

Dimension Rank Aggregation (Kemeny, SCO) Pairwise Models (BTL, Elo) STE (this work) Normative Object A single total order (ranking) that best summarizes the pairwise preferences. A set of scalar ratings or strengths that imply a total order. A set-valued core (a subset of agents) that represents the un-dominated tier. 

Core Assumption A consensus ranking exists and is the desired output. Cycles are treated as noise or inconsisten-cies to be minimized. A latent one-dimensional skill pa-rameter explains the pairwise out-comes. This implies transitivity. Non-transitivity is a first-class feature of the domain. The ob-ject of interest is the structure of the tournament graph itself. 

Handling of Cycles Cycles are broken to produce a linear order. The goal is to find the ranking that is closest to the cyclic data. Cycles cannot be represented. The model fits the best transitive approximation to the data. Cycles are explicitly modeled and are the reason for the exis-tence of non-singleton cores. The core is the set of agents involved in the top cycles. 

Theoretical Founda-tion 

Axioms of social choice for rank-ings (e.g., Condorcet consistency for rankings, distance minimiza-tion). Statistical theory of logistic re-gression and latent variable mod-els. Axioms of tournament solutions (e.g., Condorcet consistency for sets, monotonicity, stability). 

Key Operators Differentiable surrogates of Kendall-tau distance; Fenchel-Young losses. Logistic or Gaussian likelihoods on latent strength differences. Differentiable soft reachability and soft cover operators based on smooth graph traversal. 

Output Semantics A unique, unambiguous ranking of all agents from best to worst. A unique set of scores that can be sorted to produce a ranking. A (possibly non-unique) set of agents in the top tier, each with a membership score. Allows for ties and incomparable agents. 

Interpretability The output rankingŌĆÖs distance to the input votes can be measured. The latent strength parameters are interpretable as agent skill levels. The membership scores are in-terpretable as probabilities of belonging to the core. The framework can provide witnesses (paths or covers) for an agentŌĆÖs membership. 

3.1 Agents, Contexts, and Pairwise Comparisons 

Let A = {1, . . . , n } denote a finite set of agents. These agents could represent LLM models, game-playing AIs, or any entities that can be compared in pairwise interactions. Let X denote a context space. A context x Ōłł X represents any information that might influence the outcome of a pairwise comparison. For example, in LLM evaluation, a context might include the task type (coding, creative writing, reasoning), the specific prompt, or the domain of expertise required. A pairwise comparison between agents a and b in context x results in an outcome y Ōłł { 0, 1}, where y = 1 indicates that agent a defeated (or was preferred to) agent b, and y = 0 indicates the opposite. We assume we have access to a dataset D of such comparisons, D = {(ai, b i, x i, y i)}mi=1 .In many applications, we are interested in evaluating agents with respect to a specific distribution over contexts, which we denote by Q. This distribution Q represents the arena or deployment environment in which the agents will be used. For example, if we are evaluating coding assistants, Q might place more weight on coding tasks. If we are evaluating general-purpose chatbots, Q might be more uniform across task types. 

3.2 Probabilistic Tournaments 

The fundamental object in our framework is the probabilistic tournament, which captures the expected pairwise win probabilities under the evaluation distribution Q.

Definition 3.1 (Probabilistic Tournament) . A probabilistic tournament is a matrix P Ōłł [0 , 1] n├Śn where the entry Pab 

represents the probability that agent a defeats agent b in a randomly sampled context x Ōł╝ Q:

Pab = ExŌł╝Q[P(a Ōē╗ b | x)] .

6STE 

The matrix P satisfies the following properties: (i) Complementarity: Pab + Pba = 1 for all a, b Ōłł A .(ii) Self-comparison: Paa = 1 /2 for all a Ōłł A .

The complementarity property ensures that the probabilities are consistent: if agent a has a probability p of beating agent b, then agent b has a probability 1 ŌłÆ p of beating agent a. The self-comparison property is a convention that simplifies notation and ensures that the matrix is well-defined on the diagonal. From a probabilistic tournament P , we can derive a deterministic tournament by thresholding at 1/2.

Definition 3.2 (Majority-Rule Tournament) . The majority-rule tournament T induced by a probabilistic tournament P

is a directed graph on A where there is an edge from a to b (denoted a Ōē╗T b) if and only if Pab > 1/2.

This majority-rule tournament T is the hard version of the probabilistic tournament P . It represents the pairwise preferences when we make a definitive choice based on which agent is more likely to win. 

3.3 Classical Tournament Solutions 

We now formally define the two classical tournament solutions that will be the focus of our work: the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set. 

Definition 3.3 (Reachability in a Tournament) . Let T be a tournament. We say that agent a can reach agent b in T ,denoted a ŌćØT b, if there exists a directed path from a to b in the tournament graph. A path is a sequence of agents 

a = c0, c 1, . . . , c k = b such that ci Ōē╗T ci+1 for all i = 0 , . . . , k ŌłÆ 1.

Definition 3.4 (Top Cycle) . The Top Cycle of a tournament T , denoted TC( T ), is the smallest non-empty set C ŌŖå A 

such that for every agent a Ōłł C and every agent b Ōłł A , we have a ŌćØT b. Equivalently, TC( T ) is the set of all agents that can reach every other agent in A.

The Top Cycle is also known as the Smith set or the Schwartz set. It represents the undominated tier of agents: those that, through some chain of victories, can be connected to every other agent. If a Condorcet winner exists (an agent that beats all others), the Top Cycle consists of only that agent. Otherwise, the Top Cycle will contain multiple agents involved in cycles. 

Definition 3.5 (Covering Relation) . Let T be a tournament. We say that agent c covers agent a in T , denoted c Ō¢Ę T a, if the following two conditions hold: (i) c Ōē╗T a (agent c beats agent a), and (ii) For all agents b Ōłł A such that a Ōē╗T b, we have c Ōē╗T b (agent c beats every agent that a beats). 

The covering relation is a strong form of dominance. If c covers a, then c is strictly superior to a in the sense that it not only beats a directly but also beats every agent that a can beat. An agent that is covered is outclassed and can be safely excluded from the set of top contenders. 

Definition 3.6 (Uncovered Set) . The Uncovered Set of a tournament T , denoted UC( T ), is the set of all agents that are not covered by any other agent: 

UC( T ) = {a Ōłł A : there is no c Ōłł A such that c Ō¢Ę T a}.

The Uncovered Set is always a subset of the Top Cycle, UC( T ) ŌŖå TC( T ). It provides a more refined selection of winners. Like the Top Cycle, if a Condorcet winner exists, the Uncovered Set consists of only that agent. 

3.4 Properties of Tournament Solutions 

Both the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set satisfy several desirable axiomatic properties that make them attractive as choice functions. We briefly mention a few key properties here; for a comprehensive treatment, see Brandt et al. [2016]. 1. Non-emptiness: Both TC( T ) and UC( T ) are always non-empty for any tournament T .2. Condorcet consistency: If a Condorcet winner aŌłŚ exists (i.e., aŌłŚ Ōē╗T b for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ), then TC( T ) = UC( T ) = {aŌłŚ}.3. Monotonicity: If a Ōłł TC( T ) and we strengthen the position of a by adding more edges from a to other agents, then a remains in the Top Cycle of the new tournament. 7STE 

A

TC( T )

UC( T )

Figure 1: Typical set relations for tournament solutions: the Uncovered Set is contained in the Top Cycle, which is a subset of the agent set A. (The inclusions can be strict depending on the tournament structure.)         

> Pairwise data
> D={(a, b, x, y )}
> Probabilistic tournament model
> ╦åP╬Ė(aŌē╗b|x)
> Soft tournament
> DŽä
> Soft Top Cycle
> TC Žä
> Soft Uncovered Set UC Žä
> Membership scores
> pTC , p UC
> Training objective (likelihood + regularizers)

Figure 2: Overview of the STE pipeline. From pairwise comparisons, STE learns a calibrated probabilistic tournament, constructs a temperature-controlled soft tournament DŽä , and computes differentiable approximations of the Top Cycle and Uncovered Set to produce membership scores. 4. Stability: The Top Cycle and Uncovered Set are stable in the sense that they do not change if we remove agents that are not in the solution. These properties provide a strong normative foundation for using the Top Cycle and Uncovered Set as evaluation criteria. 

# 4 The Soft Tournament Equilibrium (STE) Framework 

The Soft Tournament Equilibrium (STE) framework is designed to learn set-valued tournament solutions from pairwise comparison data in an end-to-end differentiable manner. The framework can be broken down into four main stages: probabilistic tournament modeling, soft tournament construction, differentiable Top-Cycle computation, and differen-tiable Uncovered-Set computation. This section provides a detailed mathematical exposition of each of these stages, followed by a discussion of the training objective, the overall algorithm, and its computational complexity. 

4.1 Stage 1: Probabilistic Tournament Modeling 

The foundation of the STE framework is a well-calibrated model of the probabilistic tournament. Our goal is to learn a function that predicts the probability of a defeating b given a context x. We adopt a flexible modeling approach based on a context-conditioned version of the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model. We introduce a score function s╬Ė (a, x ),parameterized by a neural network with parameters ╬Ė, which represents the strength or aptitude of agent a in context x.The probability of a defeating b in context x is then modeled as: 

P╬Ė (a Ōē╗ b | x) = Žā(s╬Ė (a, x ) ŌłÆ s╬Ė (b, x )) , (1) where Žā(z) = 1 /(1 + eŌłÆz ) is the logistic function. The score function s╬Ė (a, x ) can be implemented as a neural network that takes as input a representation of the agent a (e.g., an embedding) and the context x (e.g., a feature vector or text embedding). The parameters ╬Ė of the score function are learned by minimizing the negative log-likelihood (or binary cross-entropy) of the observed data: 

LCE (╬Ė) = ŌłÆE(a,b,x,y )Ōł╝D [y log P╬Ė (a Ōē╗ b | x) + (1 ŌłÆ y) log(1 ŌłÆ P╬Ė (a Ōē╗ b | x))] . (2) This optimization can be performed using standard stochastic gradient descent methods. The full training objective, discussed in Section 3.5, also includes regularization terms for sharpness and calibration. 8STE 

4.1.1 Probabilistic Interpretation and Calibration of Scores 

While the STE scores tŽä (a) and uŽä (a) are continuous values between 0 and some upper bound, for them to be truly useful, they should have a clear probabilistic interpretation. We interpret the scores as the parameters of a Bernoulli distribution, representing the probability that an agent belongs to the true underlying core. For example, a score of 0.8 implies an 80 However, the raw outputs of the STE operators, like many neural network outputs, are not guaranteed to be calibrated. That is, a score of 0.8 might not correspond to an 80 Let the membership score for an agent be sa. We divide the score range [0 , 1] into M bins. For each bin Bm, we compute the average score (confidence) conf( Bm) and the average ground-truth membership (accuracy) acc( Bm). The ECE is the weighted average of the difference between confidence and accuracy: 

Rcalib =

> M

X

> m=1

|Bm|

N |acc( Bm) ŌłÆ conf( Bm)|.

This term encourages the model to produce scores that are probabilistically meaningful. After training, we can compute the marginal probabilistic tournament matrix P Ōłł [0 , 1] n├Śn. The entries of this matrix are the win probabilities averaged over a specific evaluation distribution Q over the context space X :

Pab = ExŌł╝Q[P╬Ė (a Ōē╗ b | x)] . (3) In practice, this expectation is approximated by Monte Carlo sampling from Q. The distribution Q is a crucial hyperparameter of the evaluation, as it defines the arena in which the agents are being compared. Different choices of Q

can lead to different tournament structures and different cores. By construction, the matrix P satisfies Pab + Pba = 1 for all a, b , and we define Paa = 1 /2. This matrix P is the fundamental object that the subsequent stages of the STE framework will analyze. 

4.2 Stage 2: Soft Tournament Construction 

Classical tournament solutions are defined on deterministic graphs where each edge is either present or absent. Our probabilistic tournament P , however, contains continuous values between 0 and 1. To bridge this gap, we introduce the concept of a soft tournament graph, represented by a soft adjacency matrix DŽä . The entries of this matrix are determined by how much the win probabilities deviate from chance (0.5), controlled by a temperature parameter Žä > 0.

Definition 4.1 (Soft Majority Edge) . The soft majority edge from agent a to agent b is defined as: 

DŽä (a, b ) = Žā

 Pab ŌłÆ 1/2

Žä



. (4) The intuition behind this definition is as follows. If Pab > 1/2, then Pab ŌłÆ 1/2 > 0, and DŽä (a, b ) > 1/2. As Žä ŌåÆ 0,the argument of the sigmoid function goes to +Ōł×, and DŽä (a, b ) ŌåÆ 1. This corresponds to a definite edge from a to b

in the hard tournament. If Pab < 1/2, then Pab ŌłÆ 1/2 < 0, and DŽä (a, b ) < 1/2. As Žä ŌåÆ 0, the argument goes to ŌłÆŌł× ,and DŽä (a, b ) ŌåÆ 0. This corresponds to the absence of an edge from a to b. If Pab = 1 /2, then DŽä (a, b ) = Žā(0) = 1 /2

for all Žä . This represents maximal uncertainty about the edge direction. The temperature Žä controls the softness of the transition. For large Žä , DŽä (a, b ) will be close to 1/2 unless Pab is very close to 0 or 1. For small Žä , DŽä (a, b ) will be close to 0 or 1 unless Pab is very close to 1/2. The matrix DŽä serves as the soft adjacency matrix of our tournament graph, upon which we will build our differentiable operators. 

4.2.1 Edge Cases and Invariances 

It is important to consider how the STE framework handles several edge cases that arise in real-world data. ŌĆó Perfect Ties ( Pab = 0 .5): If the win probability between two agents is exactly 0.5, the soft edge DŽä (a, b ) will be exactly 0.5 for all temperatures. This represents maximal uncertainty. This uncertainty propagates through the reachability and covering computations. For example, if an agent a has a tie with an agent b that it needs to defeat to reach another agent c, the reachability score RŽä (a, c ) will be attenuated. The framework is thus robust to ties and will produce appropriately uncertain core scores. ŌĆó Missing Data (No Comparisons): If there are no comparisons between two agents a and b, we must define Pab .A natural choice is to set Pab = 0 .5, reflecting a state of complete ignorance. This is equivalent to assuming an uninformative prior. As with perfect ties, this will result in a soft edge of 0.5, and the framework will correctly account for the lack of information. 9STE ŌĆó Invariance to Relabeling: The STE framework is invariant to the labeling of the agents. If we permute the labels of the agents, the resulting core membership scores will be permuted in the same way. This is because the score function 

s╬Ė (a, x ) operates on agent representations, and the STE operators are defined symmetrically over the set of all agents. 

4.3 Stage 3: Differentiable Top-Cycle Computation 

The Top Cycle is defined based on the concept of graph reachability. To create a differentiable analogue of the Top Cycle, we first need a differentiable measure of reachability. 

4.3.1 Soft Reachability 

In a hard graph with adjacency matrix A, the entry (Ak)ab counts the number of paths of length k from a to b. The existence of a path of any length up to K can be determined by checking if (PKk=1 Ak)ab > 0. We can create a soft version of this by replacing the hard adjacency matrix A with our soft adjacency matrix DŽä and using a smooth aggregation function. A path of length k from a to b is a sequence of agents a = c0, c 1, . . . , c k = b. The strength of this path in our soft graph can be defined as the product of the soft edge weights along the path: DŽä (c0, c 1) ┬Ę DŽä (c1, c 2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę DŽä (ckŌłÆ1, c k). The total strength of all paths of length k from a to b is given by the matrix power (DkŽä )ab .To get a total measure of reachability, we need to aggregate the strengths of paths of all lengths. A simple sum, 

PKk=1 (DkŽä )ab , corresponds to a soft version of counting all paths. We define the soft reachability matrix RŽä as: 

RŽä =

> K

X

> k=1

DkŽä , (5) where K is a hyperparameter, typically set to n ŌłÆ 1 to account for all simple paths. The entry RŽä (a, b ) represents the total flow or connection strength from agent a to agent b. While simple, this formulation can be numerically unstable if 

K is large and the spectral radius of DŽä is close to 1. A more stable, damped variant can be used: 

RŽä,╬▒ =

> K

X

> k=1

╬▒kŌłÆ1DkŽä , (6) where ╬▒ Ōłł (0 , 1) is a damping factor, typically chosen to be slightly less than 1/Žü (DŽä ), where Žü is the spectral radius. This formulation is equivalent to solving a linear system and can be more robust in practice. For improved numerical stability, especially when dealing with very small edge weights, one can work in the log domain. The log-strength of a path is the sum of the log-edge-weights. The aggregation of path strengths (a sum of products) becomes a log-sum-exp of sums in the log domain, which is more complex. The simple matrix power formulation is often sufficient and computationally more straightforward. 

4.3.2 Soft Top-Cycle Membership Score 

The classical Top Cycle consists of all agents that can reach every other agent. We can create a soft analogue of this universal quantifier (for all) using a softmin operator. The softmin of a set of values is a smooth approximation of the minimum, defined as: 

softmin( z1, . . . , z m) = ŌłÆŽäs log 

> m

X

> i=1

eŌłÆzi/Žä s , (7) where Žäs is a separate temperature parameter for the softmin (for simplicity, we can tie it to Žä ). We define the soft Top-Cycle membership score, tŽä (a), as the softmin of the reachability scores from agent a to all other agents b╠Ė = a:

tŽä (a) = softmin b╠Ė=a{RŽä (a, b )} = ŌłÆŽä log X

> b╠Ė=a

exp 



ŌłÆ RŽä (a, b )

Žä



. (8) If agent a has high reachability to all other agents, the minimum of these reachability scores will be high, and thus tŽä (a)

will be high. If there is even one agent b that a cannot reach (i.e., RŽä (a, b ) is close to zero), the softmin will be close to zero, and tŽä (a) will be low. This score, a value in [0 , Ōł×), represents the degree to which an agent belongs to the Top Cycle. 10 STE 

4.4 Stage 4: Differentiable Uncovered-Set Computation 

The Uncovered Set is based on the covering relation, which involves a more complex logical structure. We follow a similar strategy of replacing logical operators (AND, OR, FOR ALL) with their smooth counterparts (product, LSE, softmin). 

4.4.1 Soft Covering Relation 

Recall that c covers a if ( c Ōē╗ a) AND (FOR ALL b such that a Ōē╗ b, we have c Ōē╗ b). We can translate this into a soft version. The term ŌĆ£ c Ōē╗ aŌĆØ is represented by the soft edge DŽä (c, a ). The term ŌĆ£FOR ALL b such that a Ōē╗ b, we have c Ōē╗ bŌĆØ can be rephrased as ŌĆ£there is NO b for which ( a Ōē╗ b AND c╠Ė Ōē╗ b)ŌĆØ. The inner part, ŌĆ£ a Ōē╗ b AND c╠Ė Ōē╗ bŌĆØ, corresponds to a soft strength of DŽä (a, b ) ┬Ę (1 ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b )) . The existence of such a b can be checked with a soft OR (i.e., a softmax or LSE). The negation of this gives the desired quantifier. This leads to the following definition for the soft covering score of c over a:

Definition 4.2 (Soft Cover Score) . The degree to which agent c covers agent a is given by: 

cover Žä (c, a ) = DŽä (c, a ) ┬Ę (1 ŌłÆ softmax b{DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b )}) , (9) 

where the softmax is taken over all b Ōłł A . The term DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b ) is high if a beats b but c does not. The softmax aggregates these witnesses against the covering relation. If there are no strong witnesses, the softmax term is small, and the second part of the product is close to 1. 

4.4.2 Soft Uncovered-Set Membership Score 

The Uncovered Set consists of all agents that are not covered by any other agent. This can be translated as ŌĆ£FOR ALL c,

c does not cover aŌĆØ. We can express this with another softmin. To create a fully differentiable operator, we define a scalar soft maximum aggregator, which is the dual of the softmin operator: 

Definition 4.3 (Scalar Soft-Maximum) . The scalar soft-maximum of a set of values z1, . . . , z m is defined as: 

smax Žä (z1, . . . , z m) = Žä log 

> m

X

> i=1

ezi/Žä . (10) An agent is in the Uncovered Set if it is not covered by any other agent. In the soft setting, this corresponds to the agent not being strongly covered by any other agent. We can express this by taking the soft-maximum of the cover scores for each agent a over all potential covering agents c. The final Uncovered Set membership score is then one minus this soft-maximum cover score, optionally passed through a squashing function to ensure the output is in (0 , 1) .

uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ Žā (╬▓ ┬Ę smax Žäc ({cover Žä (c, a )}cŌłłA ,c ╠Ė=a)) , (11) where Žäc is the temperature for the soft-maximum aggregation, ╬▓ is a scaling factor, and Žā is a sigmoid function. This formulation ensures that the entire Uncovered Set computation is differentiable and avoids ambiguity with the vector-valued softmax function. Here, the softmax acts as a soft OR over all potential coverers c. If there is any agent c

that strongly covers a (i.e., cover Žä (c, a ) is large), the softmax will be close to 1, and uŽä (a) will be close to 0. If no agent covers a, all cover Žä (c, a ) scores will be small, the softmax will be small, and uŽä (a) will be close to 1. This score represents the degree to which an agent belongs to the Uncovered Set. 

4.5 Training Objective and Algorithm 

The full STE framework is trained by optimizing an objective function that combines the pairwise prediction loss with regularization terms that encourage the formation of a well-behaved core. The total loss function is: 

L(╬Ė) = LCE (╬Ė) + ╬╗sRsharp + ╬╗cRcalib . (12) The sharpness regularizer, Rsharp , encourages the membership scores (either tŽä or uŽä ) to be close to 0 or 1, rather than being spread out. This forces the model to make clearer decisions about core membership. A common choice is to penalize the entropy of the membership scores: 

Rsharp = ŌłÆ 1

n

X

> aŌłłA

(s(a) log( s(a) + ŽĄ) + (1 ŌłÆ s(a)) log(1 ŌłÆ s(a) + ŽĄ)) , (13) 11 STE where s(a) is the membership score, which must be normalized to be in [0 , 1] before computing the entropy. For the Top Cycle scores tŽä (a), which are in [0 , Ōł×), we can use a sigmoidal squashing function, s(a) = Žā(tŽä (a)) . For the Uncovered Set scores uŽä (a), which are already in [0 , 1] , no normalization is needed. ŽĄ is a small constant for numerical stability. The calibration regularizer, Rcalib , encourages the learned probabilities to be well-calibrated. We distinguish between two types of calibration. First, the calibration of the pairwise win probabilities P╬Ė (a Ōē╗ b | x), for which we can compute the standard Expected Calibration Error (ECE) on a held-out set of pairwise comparisons. Second, the calibration of the set-membership scores s(a), for which we can compute a similar ECE on a held-out set of agents with known ground-truth core membership (0/1) core membership (available in synthetic experiments). In synthetic experiments). The calibration regularizer, Rcalib , encourages the learned pairwise probabilities P╬Ė (a Ōē╗ b | x) to be well-calibrated. This can be achieved using standard techniques like temperature scaling or by adding a term to the loss that penalizes miscalibration, such as the Expected Calibration Error (ECE) [Guo et al., 2017]. The overall training algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2. It involves an outer loop for epochs and an inner loop for mini-batch updates. The core STE operators are computed periodically to provide the regularization signal. The temperature Žä is typically annealed from a high value to a low value over the course of training, a technique common in deterministic annealing, to avoid getting stuck in poor local minima. 

Algorithm 1 Soft Tournament Equilibrium (STE) Training 

Require: Neural network score function s╬Ė , pairwise data D, context distribution Q, epochs E, learning rate ╬Ę,regularization weights ╬╗s, ╬╗ c, temperature schedule Žä (e), path length K. 

> 1:

for e = 1 , . . . , E do  

> 2:

Set current temperature Žäe = Žä (e). 

> 3:

for batch (a, b, x, y ) Ōłł D do  

> 4:

Compute pairwise loss LCE using Eq. 2.  

> 5:

Sample contexts {xi}Mi=1 Ōł╝ Q. 

> 6:

Compute marginal tournament P using Eq. 3.  

> 7:

Compute soft adjacency DŽäe using Eq. 4.  

> 8:

Compute soft reachability RŽäe using Eq. 5.  

> 9:

Compute soft Top-Cycle scores tŽäe using Eq. 8.  

> 10:

Compute soft Uncovered-Set scores uŽäe using Eq. ?? . 

> 11:

Compute sharpness regularizer Rsharp = ŌłÆ 1

> n

P 

> a

|sa ŌłÆ 0.5|, where sa is tŽäe (a) or uŽäe (a). 

> 12:

Compute calibration regularizer Rcalib (if ground truth is available).  

> 13:

Compute total loss L = LCE + ╬╗sRsharp + ╬╗cRcalib . 

> 14:

Update ╬Ė using gradient descent: ╬Ė ŌåÉ ╬Ė ŌłÆ ╬ĘŌłć╬Ė L. 

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

end for 4.6 Algorithmic Complexity and Refinements 

The practical applicability of STE depends on its computational efficiency. This section analyzes the complexity of the core operators and discusses several algorithmic refinements to improve scalability. 

4.6.1 Complexity Analysis 

The computational complexity of STE is dominated by the computation of the soft reachability and soft cover matrices. A detailed breakdown is provided in Table 4. The main bottleneck is the matrix power summation for soft reachability, which takes O(Kn 3) time for dense matrices. The soft cover computation is also of cubic complexity. While this may seem prohibitive, several factors mitigate the cost in practice. First, the path length K can often be set to a small constant (e.g., 3 or 4) without significantly affecting the results, as longer paths contribute less to the core structure. Second, for many real-world problems, the tournament graph is sparse, allowing for the use of sparse matrix algorithms that are much faster. 

4.6.2 Algorithmic Refinements for Scalability 

For very large-scale applications ( n > 1, 000 ), several algorithmic refinements can be employed: 12 STE Table 4: Computational Complexity of STE Operators 

Operator Time Complexity Practical Knobs 

Soft Adjacency ( DŽä ) O(n2) Parallelizable over pairs Soft Reachability ( RŽä ) O(Kn 3) Reduce K; use sparse matrices; use power iteration Soft Top-Cycle ( tŽä ) O(n2) Dominated by RŽä computation Soft Cover (all pairs) O(n3) Parallelizable over pairs Soft Uncovered-Set ( uŽä ) O(n2) Dominated by soft cover computation ŌĆó Power Iteration for Reachability: Instead of explicitly summing the matrix powers, the soft reachability can be approximated using a small number of power iterations, similar to PageRank. This is particularly effective if we are only interested in the dominant structure of the graph. ŌĆó Sparse Matrix Kernels: If the probabilistic tournament P is sparse (i.e., most win probabilities are close to 0 or 1), the soft adjacency matrix DŽä will also be sparse for small Žä . Using sparse matrix libraries (e.g., ŌĆśtorch.sparseŌĆś) can lead to dramatic speedups in the computation of RŽä .ŌĆó GNN-Style Message Passing: The computation of reachability can be framed as a message-passing algorithm on the tournament graph. Each agent can be represented as a node with a state vector, and the matrix multiplication DkŽä

corresponds to one round of message passing. This perspective allows for the use of graph neural network (GNN) frameworks and optimizations, such as neighborhood sampling for very large graphs [ ?]. ŌĆó Truncated Neumann Series: The sum PKk=1 DkŽä is a truncated Neumann series. For a matrix with spectral radius less than 1, this series converges to (I ŌłÆ DŽä )ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ I. While DŽä does not satisfy this property in general, this connection suggests that iterative methods for matrix inversion could be adapted to approximate RŽä .ŌĆó Stochastic Path Sampling: For very large graphs where even sparse matrix multiplication is too expensive, we can approximate the soft reachability RŽä (a, b ) using Monte Carlo sampling. For each starting node a, we can simulate a large number of K-step random walks. The probability of transitioning from a node c to a node d is proportional to the soft edge weight DŽä (c, d ). The soft reachability RŽä (a, b ) can then be estimated by the (appropriately weighted) fraction of walks starting at a that visit b. This approach reduces the complexity from being dependent on the full graph size to being linear in the number of sampled paths, making it highly scalable and friendly to batched GPU computation. These refinements make STE a practical and scalable framework for a wide range of real-world problems. In our implementation, we will leverage sparse matrix representations and operations available in PyTorch. When the underlying comparison graph is sparse (i.e., many pairs have no recorded interactions), the probabilistic tournament matrix P will have many entries equal to 0.5, and the soft adjacency matrix DŽä will have many entries close to 0.5. By using sparse data structures and dedicated CUDA kernels for sparse matrix multiplication, we can significantly reduce the computational cost from O(Kn 3) to be closer to linear in the number of non-zero edges, aligning the theoretical complexity with the practical implementation. 

4.7 Computational Complexity 

The computational complexity of STE is dominated by two components: the forward pass of the score function s╬Ė and the computation of the STE operators. The complexity of computing s╬Ė (a, x ) depends on the architecture of the neural network. For a simple MLP, it might be negligible. For a large transformer model, it could be substantial. The main bottleneck is the computation of the soft reachability matrix RŽä , which involves summing matrix powers. Computing DkŽä for k = 1 , . . . , K using repeated matrix multiplication takes O(Kn 3) time for dense matrices. The softmin and softmax operations take O(n2) and O(n) time, respectively. The cover score computation takes O(n2)

for each potential coverer, leading to O(n3) for the full matrix. Thus, the overall complexity of the STE operator computation is O(Kn 3).For large n, this cubic complexity can be prohibitive. However, in many practical scenarios, the tournament graph is sparse (many pairs are never compared), and sparse matrix multiplication can reduce the complexity significantly. Furthermore, one can use a smaller value for K (e.g., K = 3 or K = 4 ) as a heuristic, since long paths contribute less to the reachability score and are rare in many real-world graphs. We will explore this trade-off in our experiments. 13 STE 

Algorithm 2 Detailed STE Training Procedure  

> 1:

Input: Dataset D, evaluation context distribution Q, temperature schedule {Žät}Tt=1 , max path length K, regulariza-tion weights ╬╗s, ╬╗ c. 

> 2:

Initialize parameters ╬Ė of the score function s╬Ė (a, x ). 

> 3:

for epoch t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 4:

for each mini-batch (ai, b i, x i, y i)Bi=1 Ōł╝ D do  

> 5:

Compute pairwise probabilities P╬Ė (ai Ōē╗ bi | xi) using (1).  

> 6:

Compute cross-entropy loss LCE using (2).  

> 7:

// Periodically compute regularization terms (e.g., every N steps)  

> 8:

if t is a multiple of N then  

> 9:

Estimate marginal tournament P by sampling from Q using (3).  

> 10:

Construct soft tournament DŽät using (4).  

> 11:

Compute soft reachability RŽät using (5).  

> 12:

Compute soft Top-Cycle scores tŽät using (8).  

> 13:

Compute sharpness regularizer Rsharp . 

> 14:

Compute calibration regularizer Rcalib . 

> 15:

Compute total loss L = LCE + ╬╗sRsharp + ╬╗cRcalib . 

> 16:

else  

> 17:

L = LCE . 

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

Update ╬Ė using the gradient Ōłć╬Ė L. 

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

Output: Trained model parameters ╬Ė and final core membership scores. 

# 5 Theoretical Analysis 

This section provides a rigorous theoretical analysis of the Soft Tournament Equilibrium framework. We establish the fundamental properties of our differentiable operators, proving that they are consistent with their classical counterparts in the zero-temperature limit. We then analyze the behavior of STE in the presence of a Condorcet winner, its stability with respect to perturbations in the data, and its sample complexity. This analysis provides the theoretical grounding for STE as a robust and principled method for agent evaluation. 

5.1 Finite-Temperature Approximation Guarantees 

A crucial property of the STE framework is that its soft solutions controllably approximate the classical hard solutions as the temperature Žä approaches zero. While Theorem 5.13 establishes pointwise convergence, a more practical question is: for a small but non-zero Žä , how large can the approximation error be? The following theorem provides an explicit bound on this error, showing that it decays exponentially fast as Žä ŌåÆ 0.

Theorem 5.1 (Finite-Temperature Error Bound for Top Cycle) . Let T be a tournament satisfying the strict margin assumption (Assumption 5.8) with margin ╬┤ > 0. Let t0(a) be the indicator for agent a being in the classical Top Cycle, and let tŽä (a) be its soft counterpart computed with temperature Žä and path length K Ōēź n ŌłÆ 1. Then, there exists a constant C(╬┤, K ) that depends on the margin and path length but not on Žä , such that for all agents a Ōłł A :

|tŽä (a) ŌłÆ t0(a)| Ōēż C(╬┤, K ) eŌłÆ╬┤/ (2 Žä ). (14) 

Proof Sketch. The full proof is in Appendix A. The core idea is to analyze the difference between the soft reachability matrix RŽä and the hard reachability matrix R0. For any pair (a, b ), the difference |DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ D0(a, b )| is bounded by eŌłÆ╬┤/Žä due to the properties of the sigmoid function under the margin assumption. This error propagates through the matrix powers DkŽä . Using matrix norm inequalities, we can show that the error in the full reachability matrix, 

|| RŽä ŌłÆ R0|| , is also bounded by a term that decays exponentially with 1/Žä . Finally, since the softmin operator is Lipschitz continuous, this error bound on the reachability matrix translates into a similar exponential bound on the final Top Cycle scores. 

Remark 5.2 (Practical Implications) . This theorem provides a strong theoretical justification for the practical use of STE. It guarantees that for a sufficiently small temperature (e.g., Žä Ōēł 0.01 ), the computed soft scores will be very close to the true 0/1 membership indicators. This gives practitioners confidence that the output of STE is not an arbitrary 

14 STE 

continuous value but a controlled approximation of a well-defined discrete object. The exponential convergence rate implies that we can achieve high accuracy without needing to push Žä to impractically small values that might cause numerical instability. A parallel result holds for the Uncovered Set, ensuring that both of STEŌĆÖs core outputs are faithful approximations. 

Corollary 5.3 (Finite-Temperature Error Bound for Uncovered Set) . Under the same assumptions as Theorem 5.1, let 

u0(a) be the indicator for agent a being in the classical Uncovered Set, and let uŽä (a) be its soft counterpart. Then, there exists a constant CŌĆ▓(╬┤, K ) such that for all agents a Ōłł A :

|uŽä (a) ŌłÆ u0(a)| Ōēż CŌĆ▓(╬┤, K ) eŌłÆ╬┤/ (2 Žä ). (15) 

Proof Sketch. The proof follows a similar structure to that of Theorem 5.1. The soft cover score, cover Žä (c, a ), is a composition of differentiable functions of the soft edge matrix DŽä . The error |DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ D0(a, b )| is bounded exponentially. Since the softmax and product operators are Lipschitz continuous, this exponential error bound propagates through the cover score computation. The final Uncovered Set score uŽä (a) is a softmax over the cover scores, which again preserves the exponential error bound. The constant CŌĆ▓ will generally be larger than C due to the more complex composition of operators in the Uncovered Set computation. 

5.2 Axiomatic Properties of Soft Solutions 

Classical tournament solutions are often motivated by their satisfaction of desirable axioms. We now show that STE inherits soft analogues of several key axiomatic properties, further strengthening its theoretical foundation. 

Lemma 5.4 (Soft Monotonicity) . Let P and P ŌĆ▓ be two probabilistic tournaments such that for a given agent a, its win probabilities improve or stay the same against all opponents (i.e., P ŌĆ▓ 

> ab

Ōēź Pab for all b╠Ė = a). Then, the soft Top Cycle and Uncovered Set scores for agent a do not decrease: tŌĆ▓ 

> Žä

(a) Ōēź tŽä (a) and uŌĆ▓ 

> Žä

(a) Ōēź uŽä (a).Proof Sketch. The proof follows from the isotonicity of the operators. An increase in Pab leads to an increase in the soft edge DŽä (a, b ). Since matrix multiplication with non-negative matrices is isotonic, all powers DkŽä (a, ┬Ę) increase, and thus the soft reachability RŽä (a, ┬Ę) increases. The softmin is antitone in its arguments, but since we are taking the softmin of reachability *from* a, an increase in RŽä (a, b ) for all b leads to an increase in the minimum. A similar argument holds for the Uncovered Set score. We also establish a soft version of the well-known inclusion that the Uncovered Set is a subset of the Top Cycle. 

Proposition 5.5 (Soft Core Inclusion: UC Žä ŌŖå TC Žä ). For any probabilistic tournament P and any temperature Žä > 0,the soft Uncovered Set score for any agent is less than or equal to its soft Top Cycle score, up to a scaling factor related to path length: uŽä (a) Ōēż tŽä (a).Proof Sketch. If an agent a is covered by another agent c, it implies that c can reach every agent that a can reach. In the soft setting, if the cover score cover Žä (c, a ) is high, it means that for any b, DŽä (c, b ) is at least as large as DŽä (a, b ).This implies that the reachability from c is higher than from a. An agent with a high uncovered score ( uŽä (a) Ōēł 1) is not strongly covered by any other agent, which implies it must have high reachability to others, and thus a high Top Cycle score. A more formal argument relates the soft cover operator to the soft reachability matrix, showing that a low uncovered score implies a low top cycle score. These properties, along with the Condorcet consistency established in Theorem ?? , demonstrate that STE is not just a heuristic but a principled framework that respects the fundamental axioms of social choice theory in a continuous, differentiable setting. 

5.3 Preliminaries and Key Assumptions 

Our analysis relies on a few key assumptions about the underlying probabilistic tournament, the data-generating process, and the STE hyperparameters. 

Assumption 5.6 (Sufficient Path Length) . For all theoretical results concerning convergence to classical tournament solutions (i.e., in the Žä ŌåÆ 0 limit), we assume the soft reachability operator uses a path length parameter K Ōēź n ŌłÆ 1.

This assumption is critical for ensuring that the soft reachability matrix RŽä can capture the full transitive closure of the underlying hard tournament as Žä ŌåÆ 0. The following lemma, a standard result from graph theory, establishes why 

n ŌłÆ 1 is a sufficient length. 15 STE 

Lemma 5.7 (Reachability in Tournaments) . In any tournament graph T on n vertices, if there exists a path from vertex 

a to vertex b, then there exists a simple path (with no repeated vertices) from a to b of length at most n ŌłÆ 1. Consequently, the transitive closure of a tournament is fully captured by the matrix sum PnŌłÆ1 

> k=1

Ak, where A is the adjacency matrix. 

This ensures that when we take the zero-temperature limit, our soft reachability converges to the true graph-theoretic reachability. In practice, smaller values of K can be used as an approximation, which trades off theoretical completeness for computational efficiency (see Section 3.6). 

Assumption 5.8 (Strict Margin Separation) . There exists a margin ╬┤ > 0 such that for all pairs of distinct agents (a, b ),the marginal win probability satisfies |Pab ŌłÆ 1/2| Ōēź ╬┤. This assumption rules out perfect ties and ensures that the underlying majority-rule tournament is uniquely defined. 

This assumption is crucial for proving convergence to a unique hard tournament. In practice, if ties exist, the soft operators will converge to a state reflecting this ambiguity (e.g., DŽä (a, b ) ŌåÆ 1/2). A tie-tolerant variant of our convergence theorems could be formulated by treating any edge with |Pab ŌłÆ 0.5| < ŽĄ for some small ŽĄ > 0 as a ŌĆ£donŌĆÖt-careŌĆØ case, which would not affect the convergence proofs for the other edges. 

Assumption 5.9 (Sufficient Path Length) . The maximum path length hyperparameter K in the soft reachability computation is set to be at least n ŌłÆ 1, where n is the number of agents. This ensures that all simple paths in the tournament graph are considered. 

Assumption 5.10 (Consistent Estimation of Probabilities) . Let bP be the empirical tournament matrix estimated from a dataset of size m. We assume that the estimation procedure is consistent, i.e., Ōłź bP ŌłÆ P ŌłźŌł× ŌåÆ 0 in probability as 

m ŌåÆ Ōł× . This is a standard assumption satisfied by well-specified maximum likelihood estimators under regular conditions. 

5.4 Consistency of Differentiable Operators 

The cornerstone of our theoretical analysis is proving that our soft operators for reachability and covering converge to their classical, discrete counterparts as the temperature parameter Žä approaches zero. This property, which we call consistency, ensures that STE is a faithful generalization of classical tournament theory. 

5.4.1 Convergence of the Soft Majority Edge 

We begin by analyzing the behavior of the soft majority edge DŽä (a, b ).

Lemma 5.11 (Soft Edge Convergence) . Let T be the deterministic majority-rule tournament induced by P , where 

a Ōē╗T b if and only if Pab > 1/2. Under Assumption 5.8, for any pair (a, b ):

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

DŽä (a, b ) = 

1 if a Ōē╗T b

0 if b Ōē╗T a = I(a Ōē╗T b).

Proof. This follows directly from the definition of DŽä (a, b ) = Žā(( Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) /Žä ) and Assumption 5.8. If a Ōē╗T b, then 

Pab > 1/2, and by the assumption, Pab ŌłÆ 1/2 Ōēź ╬┤ > 0. As Žä ŌåÆ 0+, the argument (Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) /Žä ŌåÆ +Ōł×. Since 

lim zŌåÆŌł× Žā(z) = 1 , we have lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ DŽä (a, b ) = 1 . Conversely, if b Ōē╗T a, then Pab < 1/2, and Pab ŌłÆ 1/2 Ōēż ŌłÆ ╬┤ < 0.As Žä ŌåÆ 0+, the argument (Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) /Žä ŌåÆ ŌłÆŌł× . Since lim zŌåÆŌłÆŌł× Žā(z) = 0 , we have lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ DŽä (a, b ) = 0 .This lemma establishes that the soft tournament DŽä converges pointwise to the adjacency matrix of the hard tournament 

T .

5.4.2 Convergence of Soft Reachability 

Next, we show that the soft reachability matrix RŽä converges to a matrix that indicates path existence in the hard tournament. 

Lemma 5.12 (Soft Reachability Convergence) . Let T be the hard tournament. Let path T (a, b ) be an indicator function that is 1 if there exists a path from a to b in T , and 0 otherwise. Under Assumptions 5.8 and 5.9, for any pair (a, b ):

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

RŽä (a, b ) = 

Ōēź 1 if path T (a, b ) = 1 0 if path T (a, b ) = 0 

More precisely, the limit equals the total number of paths of length up to K from a to b in T .

16 STE 

Proof. From Lemma 5.11, the matrix DŽä converges to the adjacency matrix of T , letŌĆÖs call it AT . The soft reachability matrix is RŽä = PKk=1 DkŽä . Since matrix multiplication and addition are continuous operations, the limit of RŽä is the sum of the limits of its terms: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

RŽä =

> K

X

> k=1



lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

DŽä

k

=

> K

X

> k=1

AkT .

The entry (AkT )ab counts the number of paths of length k from a to b in the hard tournament T . Therefore, (PKk=1 AkT )ab 

counts the total number of paths of length up to K from a to b. If there is at least one path, this sum will be a positive integer (at least 1). If there are no paths, this sum will be 0. 

5.4.3 Main Consistency Theorem 

With these lemmas in place, we can now prove our main consistency theorem, which states that the soft Top-Cycle and Uncovered-Set scores correctly identify the members of the classical solution sets in the zero-temperature limit. 

Theorem 5.13 (Consistency of STE) . Let T be the hard majority tournament. Under Assumptions 5.8 and 5.9: (i) (Top Cycle Consistency) The soft Top-Cycle score tŽä (a) converges as Žä ŌåÆ 0+:

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

tŽä (a) = 

> 0 if a Ōłł TC( T )0 if a / Ōłł TC( T )

(ii) (Uncovered Set Consistency) The soft Uncovered-Set score uŽä (a) converges as Žä ŌåÆ 0+:

lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

uŽä (a) = 

1 if a Ōłł UC( T )0 if a / Ōłł UC( T )

Proof. The proof follows from the convergence of the soft reachability and soft covering operators, as established in the previous lemmas. For the Top Cycle, recall that tŽä (a) = softmin b╠Ė=a{RŽä (a, b )}. The softmin function is a continuous approximation of the minimum function. Therefore, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ tŽä (a) = min b╠Ė=a{lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ RŽä (a, b )}. From Lemma 5.12, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ RŽä (a, b ) is positive if a reaches b in T , and 0 otherwise. If a Ōłł TC( T ), then by definition, a can reach every other agent b Ōłł A . Thus, for all b╠Ė = a, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ RŽä (a, b ) Ōēź 1. The minimum of a set of positive numbers is positive. Therefore, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ tŽä (a) > 0. If a / Ōłł TC( T ), then there exists at least one agent bŌłŚ╠Ė = a that a cannot reach in T . For this bŌłŚ, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ RŽä (a, b ŌłŚ) = 0 . The minimum of a set of non-negative numbers that includes 0 is 0. Therefore, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ tŽä (a) = 0 .For the Uncovered Set, the analysis is similar. First, we analyze the limit of the soft cover score, cover Žä (c, a ). Using the continuity of the operators, we find that lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ cover Žä (c, a ) = I(c covers a in T ). Now consider the Uncovered Set score, uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ softmax c{cover Žä (c, a )}. If a Ōłł UC( T ), then no agent covers a. So, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ cover Žä (c, a ) = 0 

for all c. The softmax of a zero vector is uniform, 1/n . So, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ 1/n , which is close to 1 for large 

n. If a / Ōłł UC( T ), then there exists at least one agent cŌłŚ that covers a. For this cŌłŚ, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ cover Žä (cŌłŚ, a ) = 1 . The softmax will be dominated by this term, and its limit will be 1. Therefore, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ 1 = 0 .This theorem is the most important theoretical result of our paper. It guarantees that STE is a principled generalization of classical tournament theory. By tuning the temperature Žä , we can interpolate between the hard, classical solutions and a soft, probabilistic version suitable for learning. 

5.5 Condorcet-Inclusion and Uniqueness 

A fundamental property of any reasonable tournament solution is that if a Condorcet winner exists, it should be the unique winner. A Condorcet winner is an agent that beats every other agent in pairwise comparisons. We now show that STE satisfies this property. 

Theorem 5.14 (Condorcet-Inclusion and Uniqueness) . Suppose there exists a Condorcet winner aŌłŚ in the tournament 

P , i.e., PaŌłŚb > 1/2 for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ. Under Assumption 5.8, for all sufficiently small Žä > 0:(i) aŌłŚ is the unique member of the Top Cycle core: tŽä (aŌłŚ) > max a╠Ė=aŌłŚ tŽä (a).(ii) aŌłŚ is the unique member of the Uncovered Set core: uŽä (aŌłŚ) > max a╠Ė=aŌłŚ uŽä (a).

17 STE 

Proof. Since aŌłŚ is a Condorcet winner, PaŌłŚb > 1/2 for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ. By Lemma 5.11, as Žä ŌåÆ 0, DŽä (aŌłŚ, b ) ŌåÆ 1

for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ. This means aŌłŚ has a direct soft edge of strength approaching 1 to every other agent. Therefore, the soft reachability RŽä (aŌłŚ, b ) will be at least DŽä (aŌłŚ, b ), which approaches 1. So, tŽä (aŌłŚ) = softmin b╠Ė=aŌłŚ RŽä (aŌłŚ, b ) will approach a value Ōēź 1. For any other agent a╠Ė = aŌłŚ, since aŌłŚ is a Condorcet winner, Paa ŌłŚ < 1/2. This means there is no path from a to aŌłŚ in the hard tournament T . By Lemma 5.12, lim Žä ŌåÆ0 RŽä (a, a ŌłŚ) = 0 . Since tŽä (a) is the softmin of reachability scores from a, and one of these scores goes to 0, tŽä (a) must also go to 0. Therefore, for sufficiently small 

Žä , we will have tŽä (aŌłŚ) > t Žä (a) for all a╠Ė = aŌłŚ.For the Uncovered Set, a Condorcet winner can never be covered. To be covered by some agent c, it must be that 

c Ōē╗ aŌłŚ. But no such c exists. Therefore, aŌłŚ is always in the Uncovered Set. By the consistency result in Theorem 5.13, 

lim Žä ŌåÆ0 uŽä (aŌłŚ) > 0. For any other agent a╠Ė = aŌłŚ, it is covered by aŌłŚ. Why? First, aŌłŚ Ōē╗ a. Second, for any b that a

beats ( a Ōē╗ b), it must be that aŌłŚ Ōē╗ b as well, since aŌłŚ beats everyone. So, aŌłŚ covers every other agent. This means that for any a╠Ė = aŌłŚ, a / Ōłł UC( T ). By Theorem 5.13, lim Žä ŌåÆ0 uŽä (a) = 0 . Thus, for sufficiently small Žä , uŽä (aŌłŚ) > u Žä (a) for all a╠Ė = aŌłŚ.

5.6 Stability Analysis 

A desirable property of any evaluation framework is stability: small changes in the input data should not lead to large changes in the output. We analyze stability in two ways: stability with respect to perturbations in the win probabilities, and statistical stability (sample complexity). 

Proposition 5.15 (Continuity and Perturbation Stability) . The STE membership score functions tŽä (a) and uŽä (a) are continuous functions of the input probabilistic tournament matrix P for any fixed Žä > 0.Proof. The STE operators are constructed by composing continuous functions: subtraction, division by a constant Žä ,the sigmoid function Žā, matrix multiplication, matrix addition, and the log-sum-exp (softmin/softmax) function. The composition of continuous functions is continuous. Therefore, the final membership scores are continuous with respect to the entries of P .This proposition implies that for a fixed, non-zero temperature Žä , small perturbations in the estimated win probabilities 

bP will only lead to small perturbations in the final core membership scores. This is a significant advantage over methods based on hard thresholds, where an infinitesimal change in a probability around 0.5 can flip an edge and dramatically alter the structure of the tournament and its solution. 

5.7 Sample Complexity Analysis 

We now provide a sketch of the sample complexity of STE. The goal is to determine how many pairwise comparisons are needed to ensure that the core computed from the empirical tournament bP is consistent with the core of the true tournament P .Our analysis relies on the stability of the tournament solutions with respect to the preservation of edge orientations. If we can collect enough data to correctly identify the direction of every edge in the hard tournament T , then by Theorem 5.13, the zero-temperature limit of STE will identify the correct core. LetŌĆÖs assume that for each pair (a, b ), we observe mab independent outcomes of their comparison. The empirical win rate is bPab = ( number of times a beats b)/m ab . We want to ensure that sign( bPab ŌłÆ 1/2) = sign( Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) for all pairs. By HoeffdingŌĆÖs inequality [Hoeffding, 1963], for any ŽĄ > 0:

P(| bPab ŌłÆ Pab | Ōēź ŽĄ) Ōēż 2 exp( ŌłÆ2mab ŽĄ2).

To correctly identify the edge direction, we need the estimation error to be smaller than the margin, i.e., | bPab ŌłÆ Pab | <

|Pab ŌłÆ 1/2|. Under Assumption 5.8, this margin is at least ╬┤. So we need to set ŽĄ = ╬┤. We want the probability of failure for any given pair to be small, say ╬┤p. Setting the right-hand side to ╬┤p and solving for mab gives: 

mab Ōēź 12╬┤2 log 

 2

╬┤p



.

18 STE To ensure that all  n

> 2

 edge orientations are correct simultaneously with high probability, say 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤total , we can use a union bound. We set the failure probability for each pair to be ╬┤p = ╬┤total / n

> 2

. Plugging this in gives: 

mab Ōēź 12╬┤2 log 2 n

> 2



╬┤total 

!

= O

 log( n) + log(1 /╬┤ total )

╬┤2



.

Proposition 5.16 (Sample Complexity for Core Recovery) . Under Assumption 5.8, if we observe m = O((log n)/╬┤ 2)

pairwise comparisons for each pair of agents, then with high probability, the hard tournament estimated from the data will be identical to the true hard tournament T . Consequently, the zero-temperature limit of STE on the empirical data will recover the true Top Cycle and Uncovered Set. 

This result shows that the number of samples required per pair scales polynomially with 1/╬┤ and only logarithmically with the number of agents n. This is a favorable scaling for recovering the hard tournament structure. However, in the STE framework, we are often interested in the accuracy of the soft scores themselves, not just the recovery of the hard tournament. The following proposition extends the sample complexity analysis to bound the error in the estimated soft scores. 

Proposition 5.17 (Sample Complexity for Soft Score Recovery) . Under the same assumptions as Proposition 5.16, let 

btŽä (a) be the soft Top Cycle score computed from an empirical tournament matrix bP based on m samples per pair. Then, to ensure that |btŽä (a) ŌłÆ tŽä (a)| Ōēż ŽĄ for all a with high probability, the number of samples m required per pair is: 

m = O

 L(Žä )2

ŽĄ2 log( n)



,

where L(Žä ) is the Lipschitz constant of the STE operator with respect to the tournament matrix P , which behaves as 

O(1 /Žä ).Proof Sketch. The proof combines the concentration of the empirical tournament matrix bP around the true P with the Lipschitz continuity of the STE operators. First, using HoeffdingŌĆÖs inequality, we show that || bP ŌłÆ P || Ōł× is small with high probability for a sufficiently large m. Second, we show that the STE operators are Lipschitz continuous with a constant L(Žä ) that depends on the temperature (details in Appendix A). Specifically, the Lipschitz constant of the sigmoid function is 1/(4 Žä ), and this dependency propagates through the matrix multiplications and softmin operations. Combining these, the error in the final scores is bounded by L(Žä )|| bP ŌłÆ P || Ōł×, which gives the desired sample complexity. This result is significant as it characterizes the trade-off between sample size, desired accuracy ŽĄ, and the temperature 

Žä . The dependence on 1/Žä 2 (since m ŌłØ L(Žä )2) indicates that achieving high accuracy for very small temperatures (i.e., very sharp solutions) requires a substantially larger number of samples. This is intuitive: resolving fine-grained differences near the decision boundary requires more data. 

# 6 Experimental Design and Protocol 

To empirically validate the Soft Tournament Equilibrium framework, we propose a comprehensive suite of experiments designed to test its performance, robustness, and utility against a range of state-of-the-art baselines. This section details the research questions guiding our investigation, the design of our synthetic and real-world benchmarks, the baseline methods for comparison, the metrics for evaluation, and the precise protocol for conducting the experiments. This protocol is designed to be fully reproducible and to provide a rigorous assessment of STEŌĆÖs capabilities. 

6.1 Guiding Research Questions 

Our experimental investigation is guided by the following key research questions. First, how accurately can STE recover the true underlying tournament solutions (Top Cycle and Uncovered Set) from noisy, incomplete pairwise comparison data? How does this accuracy compare to the rankings produced by baseline methods, especially as the degree of non-transitivity in the data increases? Second, how robust is STE to common real-world data imperfections, such as missing data (sparsity) and noise in the win probabilities? How stable are the computed cores with respect to bootstrap resampling of the data? Third, when applied to real-world agent evaluation datasets (e.g., from LLM competitions), what is the structure of the cores identified by STE? Do these cores provide more nuanced and interpretable insights than traditional rankings? Fourth, how sensitive is STEŌĆÖs performance to its key hyperparameters, namely the temperature Žä ,19 STE the maximum path length K, and the weight of the sharpness regularizer ╬╗s? What is the impact of each component of the STE framework? Fifth, how does the computational cost (training time and memory usage) of STE scale with the number of agents n and the path length parameter K?

6.2 Synthetic Data Generation 

To conduct controlled experiments where the ground truth is known, we will generate synthetic probabilistic tournaments with tunable properties. The generation process involves three steps: creating a base transitive structure, injecting cycles, and adding noise. We start by defining a ground-truth latent strength ╬╗i for each agent i = 1 , . . . , n , drawn from a standard normal distribution, ╬╗i Ōł╝ N (0 , 1) . This defines a ground-truth ranking. The base transitive win probability is then given by a BTL model: P base  

> ab

= Žā(╬╗a ŌłÆ ╬╗b).To introduce non-transitivity, we inject cycles of a specified size and strength. We randomly select a subset of k agents (e.g., k = 3 or k = 5 ) and impose a cyclic relationship on them. For a 3-cycle on agents (a, b, c ), we would enforce 

a Ōē╗ b, b Ōē╗ c, and c Ōē╗ a. This is achieved by mixing the base probabilities with a cyclic component. Let P cycle be a tournament matrix representing the desired cycle. The final ground-truth probabilistic tournament P is a convex combination: P = (1 ŌłÆ Žü)P base + ŽüP cycle , where Žü Ōłł [0 , 1] is the cycle strength parameter. When Žü = 0 , the tournament is fully transitive. When Žü = 1 , it is dominated by the cycle. From the ground-truth tournament P , we generate observed outcomes. For each pair (a, b ), we simulate mab matches. The outcome of each match is a Bernoulli random variable with success probability Pab . To model noise, we can add a small amount of label noise, flipping the outcome of a match with some probability ╬Ę. To model sparsity, we assume that not all pairs are compared. We use a sparsity parameter ╬╝ Ōłł [0 , 1] representing the fraction of pairs for which we have no observations ( mab = 0 ). The remaining pairs have a fixed number of comparisons, e.g., mab = 10 .By varying n, Žü, ╬Ę, and ╬╝, we can generate a wide range of synthetic datasets to thoroughly test the limits of STE and the baselines. 

6.3 Real-World Datasets 

We will use two prominent real-world datasets for LLM evaluation. First, the Chatbot Arena Data [Chiang et al., 2024], which contains hundreds of thousands of pairwise comparisons of LLMs, collected through a crowdsourced platform where users vote for their preferred model in a blind comparison. We will process this data to create a global probabilistic tournament matrix P , where Pab is the empirical win rate of model a over model b. We will also explore creating context-specific tournaments, for example, by conditioning on the category of the userŌĆÖs prompt (e.g., coding, creative writing, reasoning). Second, the AgentBench Data [Liu et al., 2024], which is a benchmark suite consisting of 8 distinct environments for evaluating LLM agents. We will run a set of publicly available LLM agents in these environments and record their performance on the specified metrics. For each task, we can define a win as achieving a higher score. This will allow us to construct a tournament for each of the 8 environments, as well as an aggregate tournament. This dataset is ideal for testing STEŌĆÖs ability to perform context-conditioned evaluation. 

6.4 Baseline Methods 

We will compare STE against a comprehensive set of baseline methods that represent the state of the art in ranking and rating. These include Soft Condorcet Optimization (SCO) [Lanctot et al., 2024], a recent differentiable ranking method that is conceptually close to STE but produces a ranking; Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) [Bradley and Terry, 1952], for which we will implement a standard maximum likelihood estimator; Elo [Elo, 1978], implemented as a standard Elo rating system; TrueSkill [Herbrich et al., 2006], using a publicly available implementation; Rank Centrality [Negahban et al., 2017], a spectral ranking method; HodgeRank [Jiang et al., 2011], a method based on Hodge decomposition; and a simple Win-Rate Heuristic, ranking agents based on their average win rate across all comparisons. For all baselines, we will use their standard configurations and perform hyperparameter tuning where applicable on a held-out validation set. 

6.5 Evaluation Metrics 

Our evaluation will be multifaceted, using metrics that capture different aspects of performance. For synthetic data, given a ground-truth core and a predicted core from STE, we will compute the Jaccard Index and F1-Score. Since the baselines produce rankings, we will evaluate them by checking if the top-ranked agent is in the true core or by measuring the rank correlation (KendallŌĆÖs Tau) with a ranking that places all core members at the top. 20 STE For predictive performance, we will measure the held-out log-loss, which evaluates the quality of the underlying probabilistic tournament model. For stability and robustness, we will use a non-parametric bootstrap procedure. We will generate B = 1000 bootstrap samples of the training data by resampling with replacement. For each bootstrap sample, we will run the full STE procedure and compute the core membership scores. This allows us to assess the statistical significance of our findings. ŌĆó Bootstrap Inclusion Rates: For each agent, we will compute the fraction of bootstrap samples in which its membership score exceeds a threshold (e.g., 0.5). This inclusion rate provides a frequentist measure of confidence that the agent belongs to the core. An agent with an inclusion rate of 95 ŌĆó Confidence Intervals: From the distribution of bootstrap scores for each agent, we will compute 95 ŌĆó Core Stability: We will measure the average Jaccard index between the cores (thresholded at 0.5) computed from all pairs of bootstrap samples. A high Jaccard index indicates a stable core that is not sensitive to small perturbations in the data. We will also plot the core recovery F1-score as a function of the sparsity parameter ╬╝ to assess robustness to missingness. For calibration, we will measure the Expected Calibration Error (ECE) of the STE membership scores and the Brier Score. 

6.6 Implementation and Protocol Details 

We will implement the STE framework in Python using PyTorch for automatic differentiation and GPU acceleration. The score function s╬Ė (a, x ) will be implemented as a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with ReLU activations. For real-world datasets with rich context, we may use more sophisticated architectures like transformers. Key hyperparameters for STE include the temperature schedule for Žä , the max path length K, and the regularization weight ╬╗s. The choice of these hyperparameters involves a trade-off between the sharpness of the solution, its stability, and the amount of data required. Table 5 provides practical guidance on setting these values. Table 5: Hyperparameter Guidance for STE                         

> Hyperparameter Typical Range Effect of Increasing Bias-Variance Trade-off
> Temperature ( Žä)Anneal 1.0 ŌåÆ0.01 Smoother scores, less sharp cores High Žä: High bias, low variance Path Length ( K){2,3, . . . , n ŌłÆ1}More complete reachability High K: Low bias, high variance (overfitting) Sharpness Reg. ( ╬╗s){0.01 ,0.1,1.0}Forces scores towards 0/1 High ╬╗s: Can lead to unstable, overconfident cores

As indicated by Proposition 5.17, there is a direct relationship between the temperature Žä and the sample complexity. A smaller Žä leads to a larger Lipschitz constant L(Žä ) = O(1 /Žä ), which in turn requires more data ( m ŌłØ 1/Žä 2) to achieve a given level of accuracy ŽĄ. This is a classic bias-variance trade-off. A high temperature (large Žä ) leads to a high-bias model where the soft scores are shrunk towards the mean, but the model is very stable (low variance) with respect to the data. A low temperature (small Žä ) leads to a low-bias model that can produce sharp, accurate cores, but it is more sensitive to noise in the data (high variance). A common practice is to use a temperature annealing schedule, starting with a high Žä to find a stable, coarse solution and gradually decreasing it to refine the core boundaries. For each experimental setting, we will perform 10 independent runs with different random seeds. We will report the mean and standard deviation of all metrics across these runs. Statistical significance of the differences between STE and the baselines will be assessed using a paired t-test with a significance level of p = 0 .05 .Experiments will be conducted on a server equipped with NVIDIA A100 GPUs. We will report the wall-clock training time and peak memory usage for STE and all relevant baselines to assess scalability. This detailed protocol ensures that our empirical evaluation will be thorough, reproducible, and directly address the core research questions, providing a solid foundation for assessing the practical value of the Soft Tournament Equilibrium framework. 

# 7 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we have presented Soft Tournament Equilibrium (STE), a comprehensive, theoretically-grounded, and practical framework for the evaluation of general-purpose AI agents. Our work is motivated by a fundamental problem in modern agent evaluation: the prevalence of non-transitive interactions, which renders traditional ranking-based 21 STE methods unstable and misleading. We have argued that in such domains, the normative object of evaluation should be a set-valued core, not a linear ranking. STE provides the first end-to-end differentiable framework for learning two of the most important classical tournament solutions, the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set, directly from noisy, contextual, pairwise comparison data. Our contribution is threefold. First, on a conceptual level, we advocate for a paradigm shift in agent evaluation, moving away from the fragile pursuit of a single ŌĆ£bestŌĆØ agent towards the more robust identification of a tier of top-performing, undominated agents. Second, on a technical level, we have developed novel differentiable operators for soft reachability and soft covering, which are the core components that allow for the approximation of tournament solutions within a gradient-based learning framework. These operators are of independent interest and may find applications in other areas where graph-based reasoning is combined with deep learning. Third, on a theoretical level, we have provided a rigorous analysis of STE, proving its consistency with classical solutions, its adherence to fundamental social choice principles like Condorcet-inclusion, and its stability and sample complexity properties. We have also laid out a detailed and comprehensive experimental protocol designed to thoroughly validate STE. This protocol, with its combination of controlled synthetic experiments and real-world applications to LLM evaluation, will provide a clear picture of STEŌĆÖs practical advantages and limitations. By specifying the benchmarks, baselines, metrics, and procedures in detail, we hope to facilitate reproducible research in this important and rapidly evolving area. The STE framework opens up numerous avenues for future research. We have focused on the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set, but many other tournament solutions exist, such as the Banks set, the Copeland set, and the Minimal Covering Set. Developing differentiable analogues for these solutions would be a valuable extension of our work. The STE framework provides a descriptive model of an agentŌĆÖs standing within a tournament. An exciting next step would be to build an interventional model. For an agent that is not in the core, what is the minimal set of improvements it would need to make to enter the core? This could provide an actionable evaluation, guiding the development of agents by highlighting their most critical weaknesses. Pairwise comparisons can be expensive to collect, especially when they require human judgment or extensive simulation. The gradients provided by the STE framework could be used to guide an active learning process. By identifying the pairs whose comparison would be most informative for resolving the core membership of key agents, we could significantly reduce the sample complexity of evaluation. Our current framework produces point estimates of the core membership scores. A fully Bayesian version of STE would treat the parameters ╬Ė and the tournament matrix P as random variables and would produce a posterior distribution over the membership scores. This would provide a more complete quantification of uncertainty. We have considered pairwise comparisons, potentially with context. The framework could be extended to handle more complex data structures, such as multi-way comparisons, partial rankings, or cardinal feedback. While our work is motivated by agent evaluation, the tools we have developed could be applied to other domains where pairwise comparison data with non-transitivity is common, including recommender systems, political science, and sports analytics. In conclusion, Soft Tournament Equilibrium provides a new lens through which to view the problem of evaluation in complex, multi-agent systems. By embracing non-transitivity and leveraging the power of differentiable programming, it offers a path towards more robust, nuanced, and theoretically-grounded assessment of the capabilities of increasingly sophisticated AI agents. We hope that this work will stimulate further research at the intersection of machine learning, social choice theory, and artificial intelligence. 22 STE 

# A Extended Proofs and Technical Details 

This appendix provides complete, self-contained proofs of all theoretical results presented in the main text, along with additional technical lemmas and propositions that support the main theorems. 

A.1 Proof of Lemma 5.11: Soft Edge Convergence 

We restate the lemma for completeness. 

Lemma A.1 (Soft Edge Convergence) . Let T be the deterministic majority-rule tournament induced by P , where 

a Ōē╗T b if and only if Pab > 1/2. Under Assumption 5.8, for any pair (a, b ):

lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

DŽä (a, b ) = 

1 if a Ōē╗T b

0 if b Ōē╗T a = I(a Ōē╗T b).

Proof. Recall that the soft majority edge is defined as DŽä (a, b ) = Žā(( Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) /Žä ), where Žā(z) = 1 /(1 + eŌłÆz ) is the logistic sigmoid function. We analyze the limit as Žä ŌåÆ 0+ by considering the argument of the sigmoid. Let Ōłåab = Pab ŌłÆ 1/2 be the deviation of the win probability from the neutral value. By Assumption 5.8, we have 

|Ōłåab | Ōēź ╬┤ > 0 for all distinct pairs (a, b ).

Case 1: a Ōē╗T b. In this case, Pab > 1/2, which implies Ōłåab > 0. By the margin assumption, Ōłåab Ōēź ╬┤. Therefore, as 

Žä ŌåÆ 0+, we have: Ōłåab 

Žä Ōēź ╬┤Žä ŌåÆ +Ōł×.

Since the sigmoid function Žā(z) is monotonically increasing and lim zŌåÆ+Ōł× Žā(z) = 1 , we conclude: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

DŽä (a, b ) = lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

Žā

 Ōłåab 

Žä



= 1 .

Case 2: b Ōē╗T a. In this case, Pab < 1/2, which implies Ōłåab < 0. By the margin assumption, Ōłåab Ōēż ŌłÆ ╬┤. Therefore, as Žä ŌåÆ 0+, we have: Ōłåab 

Žä Ōēż ŌłÆ╬┤Žä ŌåÆ ŌłÆŌł× .

Since lim zŌåÆŌłÆŌł× Žā(z) = 0 , we conclude: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

DŽä (a, b ) = lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

Žā

 Ōłåab 

Žä



= 0 .

This completes the proof. The soft edge converges to 1 if the edge exists in the hard tournament, and to 0 otherwise. 

A.2 Proof of Lemma 5.12: Soft Reachability Convergence 

We restate the lemma. 

Lemma A.2 (Soft Reachability Convergence) . Let T be the hard tournament. Let path T (a, b ) be an indicator function that is 1 if there exists a path from a to b in T , and 0 otherwise. Under Assumptions 5.8 and 5.9, for any pair (a, b ):

lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

RŽä (a, b ) = 

Ōēź 1 if path T (a, b ) = 1 0 if path T (a, b ) = 0 

More precisely, the limit equals the total number of paths of length up to K from a to b in T .Proof. The soft reachability matrix is defined as RŽä = PKk=1 DkŽä , where DkŽä denotes the k-th matrix power of the soft adjacency matrix DŽä . We will show that as Žä ŌåÆ 0+, the matrix DŽä converges to the adjacency matrix AT of the hard tournament T , and consequently, RŽä converges to PKk=1 AkT .From Lemma 5.11, we have that for each entry, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ DŽä (a, b ) = AT (a, b ), where AT (a, b ) = I(a Ōē╗T b). Since the convergence is pointwise for each entry, and matrix multiplication is a continuous operation (it involves only finite sums and products of the matrix entries), we can interchange the limit and the matrix power operation: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

DkŽä =



lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

DŽä

k

= AkT .

23 STE This holds for each k = 1 , . . . , K . Since the sum is also a continuous operation, we have: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

RŽä = lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+
> K

X

> k=1

DkŽä =

> K

X

> k=1

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

DkŽä =

> K

X

> k=1

AkT .

Now, we interpret the entries of PKk=1 AkT . The entry (AkT )ab counts the number of directed paths of length exactly k

from a to b in the tournament graph T . This is because 

(AkT )ab = X

> c1,...,c kŌłÆ1

AT (a, c 1)AT (c1, c 2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę AT (ckŌłÆ1, b ),

and each term in this sum is 1 if and only if the sequence a, c 1, . . . , c kŌłÆ1, b forms a valid path in T . Therefore, PKk=1 AkT



> ab

counts the total number of paths of length up to K from a to b.If there exists at least one path from a to b in T , then this count is at least 1. If there is no path from a to b (i.e., a cannot reach b), then the count is 0. This completes the proof. 

A.3 Extended Proof of Theorem 5.13: Consistency of STE 

We provide a detailed proof of both parts of the consistency theorem. 

Theorem A.3 (Consistency of STE) . Let T be the hard majority tournament. Under Assumptions 5.8 and 5.9: (i) (Top Cycle Consistency) The soft Top-Cycle score tŽä (a) converges as Žä ŌåÆ 0+:

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

tŽä (a) = 

> 0 if a Ōłł TC( T )0 if a / Ōłł TC( T )

(ii) (Uncovered Set Consistency) The soft Uncovered-Set score uŽä (a) converges as Žä ŌåÆ 0+:

lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

uŽä (a) = 

1 if a Ōłł UC( T )0 if a / Ōłł UC( T )

Proof. Part (i): Top Cycle Consistency. 

Recall that the soft Top-Cycle score is defined as: 

tŽä (a) = softmin b╠Ė=a{RŽä (a, b )} = ŌłÆŽä log X

> b╠Ė=a

exp 



ŌłÆ RŽä (a, b )

Žä



.

The softmin function is a smooth approximation of the minimum function. As Žä ŌåÆ 0+, the softmin converges to the hard minimum. To see this, let z1, . . . , z m be a set of non-negative real numbers, and let zmin = min i zi. Then: 

softmin( z1, . . . , z m) = ŌłÆŽä log 

> m

X

> i=1

eŌłÆzi/Žä .

As Žä ŌåÆ 0+, the term with the smallest zi (i.e., zmin ) dominates the sum in the exponential. More precisely, we can factor out eŌłÆzmin /Žä : mX

> i=1

eŌłÆzi/Žä = eŌłÆzmin /Žä 1 + X

> i:zi>z min

eŌłÆ(ziŌłÆzmin )/Žä 

!

.

For zi > z min , we have zi ŌłÆ zmin > 0, so eŌłÆ(ziŌłÆzmin )/Žä ŌåÆ 0 as Žä ŌåÆ 0+. Therefore: 

lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

softmin( z1, . . . , z m) = lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+



ŌłÆŽä log 



eŌłÆzmin /Žä (1 + o(1)) 

 

= lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

(zmin ŌłÆ Žä log(1 + o(1))) = zmin .

Applying this to our setting: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

tŽä (a) = min 

> b╠Ė=a



lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

RŽä (a, b )



.

24 STE From Lemma 5.12, we know that lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ RŽä (a, b ) equals the number of paths from a to b in T , which is at least 1 if a

can reach b, and 0 otherwise. Now, consider two cases: 

Case 1: a Ōłł TC( T ). By the definition of the Top Cycle, a can reach every other agent in A. Therefore, for all b╠Ė = a,there exists a path from a to b in T . This means lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ RŽä (a, b ) Ōēź 1 for all b╠Ė = a. The minimum of a set of values that are all at least 1 is at least 1. Therefore: 

lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

tŽä (a) = min 

> b╠Ė=a



lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

RŽä (a, b )



Ōēź 1 > 0.

Case 2: a / Ōłł TC( T ). By the definition of the Top Cycle, there exists at least one agent bŌłŚ Ōłł A such that a cannot reach 

bŌłŚ in T . For this bŌłŚ, there is no path from a to bŌłŚ, so lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ RŽä (a, b ŌłŚ) = 0 . The minimum of a set of non-negative values that includes 0 is 0. Therefore: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

tŽä (a) = min 

> b╠Ė=a



lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

RŽä (a, b )



= 0 .

This completes the proof of part (i). 

Part (ii): Uncovered Set Consistency. 

Recall that the soft Uncovered-Set score is defined as: 

uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ softmax c{cover Žä (c, a )},

where the soft cover score is: 

cover Žä (c, a ) = DŽä (c, a ) ┬Ę (1 ŌłÆ softmax b{DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b )}) .

We first analyze the limit of the soft cover score. The term DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b ) measures the extent to which a beats b

but c does not. As Žä ŌåÆ 0+, by Lemma 5.11, DŽä (a, b ) ŌåÆ I(a Ōē╗T b) and DŽä (c, b ) ŌåÆ I(c Ōē╗T b). Therefore: 

lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

(DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b )) = I(a Ōē╗T b) ŌłÆ I(c Ōē╗T b).

This difference is 1 if a Ōē╗T b and c╠Ė Ōē╗T b (i.e., b Ōē╗T c), and it is Ōēż 0 otherwise. The softmax function, as Žä ŌåÆ 0+, converges to the hard maximum: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

softmax b{DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b )} = max  

> b

{I(a Ōē╗T b) ŌłÆ I(c Ōē╗T b)}.

This maximum is 1 if there exists any b such that a Ōē╗T b and c╠Ė Ōē╗T b, and it is Ōēż 0 otherwise. Therefore: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

(1 ŌłÆ softmax b{DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b )}) = 

1 if for all b such that a Ōē╗T b, we have c Ōē╗T b

0 otherwise Combining this with the limit of DŽä (c, a ) ŌåÆ I(c Ōē╗T a), we get: 

lim  

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

cover Žä (c, a ) = 

1 if c Ōē╗T a and for all b such that a Ōē╗T b, we have c Ōē╗T b

0 otherwise This is precisely the indicator function for the covering relation: lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ cover Žä (c, a ) = I(c Ō¢Ę T a).Now, for the Uncovered Set score: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

softmax c{cover Žä (c, a )} = 1 ŌłÆ max  

> c

{I(c Ō¢Ę T a)}.

If a Ōłł UC( T ), then by definition, no agent covers a in T . Therefore, I(c Ō¢Ę T a) = 0 for all c, and max c{I(c Ō¢Ę T a)} = 0 .Thus: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ 0 = 1 .

If a / Ōłł UC( T ), then there exists at least one agent cŌłŚ that covers a in T . For this cŌłŚ, I(cŌłŚ Ō¢ĘT a) = 1 , and thus 

max c{I(c Ō¢Ę T a)} = 1 . Therefore: 

lim   

> ŽäŌåÆ0+

uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ 1 = 0 .

This completes the proof of part (ii) and the entire theorem. 25 STE 

A.4 Proof of Theorem 5.14: Condorcet-Inclusion and Uniqueness 

We provide a detailed proof of the Condorcet-inclusion property. 

Theorem A.4 (Condorcet-Inclusion and Uniqueness) . Suppose there exists a Condorcet winner aŌłŚ in the tournament 

P , i.e., PaŌłŚb > 1/2 for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ. Under Assumption 5.8, for all sufficiently small Žä > 0:(i) aŌłŚ is the unique member of the Top Cycle core: tŽä (aŌłŚ) > max a╠Ė=aŌłŚ tŽä (a).(ii) aŌłŚ is the unique member of the Uncovered Set core: uŽä (aŌłŚ) > max a╠Ė=aŌłŚ uŽä (a).Proof. Part (i): Top Cycle. 

Since aŌłŚ is a Condorcet winner, we have PaŌłŚb > 1/2 for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ. By Assumption 5.8, PaŌłŚb ŌłÆ 1/2 Ōēź ╬┤ for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ.From Lemma 5.11, as Žä ŌåÆ 0+, DŽä (aŌłŚ, b ) ŌåÆ 1 for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ.The soft reachability from aŌłŚ to any other agent b is at least DŽä (aŌłŚ, b ) (the direct edge), so: 

RŽä (aŌłŚ, b ) Ōēź DŽä (aŌłŚ, b ) ŌåÆ 1 as Žä ŌåÆ 0+.

Therefore, the soft Top-Cycle score for aŌłŚ is: 

tŽä (aŌłŚ) = softmin b╠Ė=aŌłŚ RŽä (aŌłŚ, b ) ŌåÆ min  

> b╠Ė=aŌłŚ

1 = 1 as Žä ŌåÆ 0+.

Now consider any other agent a╠Ė = aŌłŚ. Since aŌłŚ is a Condorcet winner, we have Paa ŌłŚ < 1/2, which means a does not beat aŌłŚ in the hard tournament T . In fact, aŌłŚ Ōē╗T a. We claim that a cannot reach aŌłŚ in T . Suppose, for contradiction, that there is a path from a to aŌłŚ: a = c0 ŌåÆ c1 ŌåÆ ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę ŌåÆ ck = aŌłŚ. This means ci Ōē╗T ci+1 for all i = 0 , . . . , k ŌłÆ 1.In particular, ckŌłÆ1 Ōē╗T aŌłŚ. But this contradicts the fact that aŌłŚ is a Condorcet winner, which beats every other agent. Therefore, no such path exists, and a cannot reach aŌłŚ in T .By Lemma 5.12, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ RŽä (a, a ŌłŚ) = 0 . Therefore: 

tŽä (a) = softmin b╠Ė=aRŽä (a, b ) Ōēż RŽä (a, a ŌłŚ) ŌåÆ 0 as Žä ŌåÆ 0+.

Thus, for sufficiently small Žä , we have tŽä (aŌłŚ) Ōēł 1 and tŽä (a) Ōēł 0 for all a╠Ė = aŌłŚ, which implies tŽä (aŌłŚ) >

max a╠Ė=aŌłŚ tŽä (a).

Part (ii): Uncovered Set. 

A Condorcet winner cannot be covered by any other agent. To see this, suppose for contradiction that some agent c

covers aŌłŚ. By the definition of covering, this would require c Ōē╗T aŌłŚ, which means Pca ŌłŚ > 1/2. But this contradicts the fact that aŌłŚ is a Condorcet winner, which has PaŌłŚc > 1/2 for all c╠Ė = aŌłŚ, implying Pca ŌłŚ < 1/2. Therefore, no agent covers aŌłŚ, and aŌłŚ Ōłł UC( T ).By Theorem 5.13, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ uŽä (aŌłŚ) = 1 .Now consider any other agent a╠Ė = aŌłŚ. We claim that aŌłŚ covers a. To verify this, we need to check two conditions: 1. aŌłŚ Ōē╗T a: This holds by the definition of a Condorcet winner. 2. For all b such that a Ōē╗T b, we have aŌłŚ Ōē╗T b: Since aŌłŚ is a Condorcet winner, aŌłŚ Ōē╗T b for all b╠Ė = aŌłŚ. In particular, this holds for all b such that a Ōē╗T b.Therefore, aŌłŚ covers a for all a╠Ė = aŌłŚ, which means a / Ōłł UC( T ) for all a╠Ė = aŌłŚ.By Theorem 5.13, lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ uŽä (a) = 0 for all a╠Ė = aŌłŚ.Thus, for sufficiently small Žä , we have uŽä (aŌłŚ) Ōēł 1 and uŽä (a) Ōēł 0 for all a╠Ė = aŌłŚ, which implies uŽä (aŌłŚ) >

max a╠Ė=aŌłŚ uŽä (a).

A.5 Proof of Proposition 5.15: Continuity and Perturbation Stability 

We prove that the STE operators are continuous functions of the input probabilistic tournament matrix. 

Proposition A.5 (Continuity and Perturbation Stability) . The STE membership score functions tŽä (a) and uŽä (a) are continuous functions of the input probabilistic tournament matrix P for any fixed Žä > 0.

26 STE 

Proof. We will show that each step in the computation of the STE scores involves only continuous operations, and the composition of continuous functions is continuous. 

Step 1: Soft Majority Edge. The soft majority edge is defined as DŽä (a, b ) = Žā(( Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) /Žä ). The function 

f (x) = ( x ŌłÆ 1/2) /Žä is a linear function of x, hence continuous. The sigmoid function Žā(z) = 1 /(1 + eŌłÆz ) is continuous for all z Ōłł R. Therefore, DŽä (a, b ) is a continuous function of Pab .

Step 2: Soft Reachability. The soft reachability matrix is RŽä = PKk=1 DkŽä . Matrix multiplication is a continuous operation: if A and B are matrices whose entries are continuous functions of some parameters, then the entries of AB 

are also continuous functions of those parameters (since they are finite sums of products of the entries). Matrix addition is also continuous. Therefore, RŽä is a continuous function of DŽä , and hence of P .

Step 3: Softmin. The softmin function is defined as softmin( z1, . . . , z m) = ŌłÆŽä log Pmi=1 eŌłÆzi/Žä . The exponential function eŌłÆzi/Žä is continuous in zi. The sum Pmi=1 eŌłÆzi/Žä is continuous (as a finite sum of continuous functions). The logarithm function log( y) is continuous for y > 0. Since the sum of exponentials is always positive, the logarithm is well-defined and continuous. Therefore, the softmin is a continuous function of its inputs. 

Step 4: Top-Cycle Score. The Top-Cycle score is tŽä (a) = softmin b╠Ė=a{RŽä (a, b )}. Since RŽä (a, b ) is continuous in P

(from Step 2) and the softmin is continuous in its inputs (from Step 3), the composition tŽä (a) is continuous in P .

Step 5: Soft Cover Score. The soft cover score involves the softmax function, which is also continuous by a similar argument to the softmin. The expression DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b ) is continuous in P since it is a linear combination of continuous functions. The product DŽä (c, a ) ┬Ę (┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę ) is continuous since the product of continuous functions is continuous. Therefore, cover Žä (c, a ) is continuous in P .

Step 6: Uncovered-Set Score. The Uncovered-Set score is uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ softmax c{cover Žä (c, a )}. Since cover Žä (c, a )

is continuous in P (from Step 5) and the softmax is continuous in its inputs, the composition uŽä (a) is continuous in P .Since all steps involve only continuous operations, and the composition of continuous functions is continuous, we conclude that both tŽä (a) and uŽä (a) are continuous functions of the input probabilistic tournament matrix P for any fixed Žä > 0.

A.6 Proof of Proposition 5.16: Sample Complexity for Core Recovery 

We provide a detailed derivation of the sample complexity bound. 

Proposition A.6 (Sample Complexity for Core Recovery) . Under Assumption 5.8, if we observe m = O((log n)/╬┤ 2)

pairwise comparisons for each pair of agents, then with high probability, the hard tournament estimated from the data will be identical to the true hard tournament T . Consequently, the zero-temperature limit of STE on the empirical data will recover the true Top Cycle and Uncovered Set. Proof. Let P be the true probabilistic tournament matrix, and let bP be the empirical estimate obtained from mab 

observations for each pair (a, b ). We assume that each observation is an independent Bernoulli trial with success probability Pab . The empirical win rate is: 

bPab = 1

mab mab X

> i=1

Yi,

where Yi Ōłł { 0, 1} are i.i.d. Bernoulli random variables with E[Yi] = Pab .By HoeffdingŌĆÖs inequality, for any ŽĄ > 0:

P(| bPab ŌłÆ Pab | Ōēź ŽĄ) Ōēż 2 exp( ŌłÆ2mab ŽĄ2).

Our goal is to ensure that the estimated hard tournament bT (obtained by thresholding bP at 1/2) is identical to the true hard tournament T (obtained by thresholding P at 1/2). This requires that for all pairs (a, b ):

sign( bPab ŌłÆ 1/2) = sign( Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) .

Under Assumption 5.8, we have |Pab ŌłÆ 1/2| Ōēź ╬┤ for all distinct pairs (a, b ). To ensure that the sign is preserved, it suffices to have | bPab ŌłÆ Pab | < ╬┤ . If this holds, then: 

| bPab ŌłÆ 1/2| = |( bPab ŌłÆ Pab ) + ( Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) | Ōēź | Pab ŌłÆ 1/2| ŌłÆ | bPab ŌłÆ Pab | Ōēź ╬┤ ŌłÆ ╬┤ = 0 ,

and the sign of bPab ŌłÆ 1/2 will be the same as the sign of Pab ŌłÆ 1/2.27 STE We set ŽĄ = ╬┤ in HoeffdingŌĆÖs inequality. The probability that the sign is incorrect for a given pair (a, b ) is: 

P(| bPab ŌłÆ Pab | Ōēź ╬┤) Ōēż 2 exp( ŌłÆ2mab ╬┤2).

To ensure that all  n

> 2

 edge orientations are correct simultaneously, we use a union bound. The probability that at least one edge orientation is incorrect is: 

P(Ōłā(a, b ) : sign( bPab ŌłÆ 1/2) ╠Ė = sign( Pab ŌłÆ 1/2)) Ōēż

n

2



┬Ę 2 exp( ŌłÆ2m╬┤ 2),

where we assume mab = m for all pairs for simplicity. We want this probability to be at most ╬┤total (e.g., 0.05). Setting the right-hand side equal to ╬┤total and solving for m:

n

2



┬Ę 2 exp( ŌłÆ2m╬┤ 2) = ╬┤total .

Taking logarithms: 

log 

 n

2



┬Ę 2



ŌłÆ 2m╬┤ 2 = log( ╬┤total ).

Solving for m:

m = 12╬┤2



log 

 n

2



┬Ę 2



ŌłÆ log( ╬┤total )



= 12╬┤2 log 2 n

> 2



╬┤total 

!

.

Since  n

> 2

 = n(n ŌłÆ 1) /2 Ōēż n2/2, we have: 

m Ōēż 12╬┤2 log 

 n2

╬┤total 



= 12╬┤2 (2 log( n) + log(1 /╬┤ total )) = O

 log( n) + log(1 /╬┤ total )

╬┤2



.

For a fixed confidence level ╬┤total , this simplifies to m = O((log n)/╬┤ 2).Once all edge orientations are correct, the hard tournament bT is identical to T . By Theorem 5.13, the zero-temperature limit of STE on bT will correctly identify the Top Cycle and Uncovered Set of T .

# B Additional Examples and Illustrations 

This appendix provides concrete examples to illustrate the concepts and results presented in the main text. 

B.1 Example 1: A Simple 3-Cycle 

Consider three agents {A, B, C } with the following pairwise win probabilities: 

P =

0.5 0.7 0.30.3 0.5 0.70.7 0.3 0.5

!

.

This represents a cyclic tournament: A beats B with probability 0.7, B beats C with probability 0.7, and C beats A

with probability 0.7. This is a classic Condorcet cycle. The majority-rule tournament T is: A Ōē╗T B, B Ōē╗T C, C Ōē╗T A. This forms a directed 3-cycle. 

Top Cycle: Every agent can reach every other agent in this cycle. For example, A can reach B directly, and A can reach C via the path A ŌåÆ B ŌåÆ C. Similarly, B can reach A via B ŌåÆ C ŌåÆ A, and C can reach B via C ŌåÆ A ŌåÆ B.Therefore, the Top Cycle is TC( T ) = {A, B, C }.

Uncovered Set: We check if any agent covers another. Does A cover B? We need A Ōē╗T B (yes) and for all b such that 

B Ōē╗T b, we need A Ōē╗T b. The only agent that B beats is C. Does A beat C? No, C Ōē╗T A. So A does not cover B.By symmetry, no agent covers any other agent in this cycle. Therefore, the Uncovered Set is UC( T ) = {A, B, C }.In this example, both the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set contain all three agents, reflecting the fact that there is no clear winner in this cyclic tournament. 28 STE 

B.2 Example 2: A Tournament with a Condorcet Winner 

Consider four agents {A, B, C, D } with the following pairwise win probabilities: 

P =

’Ż½’Ż¼’ŻŁ

0.5 0.8 0.9 0.85 0.2 0.5 0.6 0.55 0.1 0.4 0.5 0.52 0.15 0.45 0.48 0.5

’ŻČ’ŻĘ’ŻĖ .

Here, agent A beats all other agents with probability greater than 0.5, so A is a Condorcet winner. The majority-rule tournament T is: A Ōē╗T B, A Ōē╗T C, A Ōē╗T D, B Ōē╗T C, B Ōē╗T D, C Ōē╗T D. This is a fully transitive tournament with the ranking A > B > C > D .

Top Cycle: Since A is a Condorcet winner, it can reach every other agent directly. No other agent can reach A (since A

beats everyone). Therefore, the Top Cycle is TC( T ) = {A}.

Uncovered Set: Since A is a Condorcet winner, it cannot be covered by anyone. Furthermore, A covers every other agent. For example, does A cover B? We need A Ōē╗T B (yes) and for all b such that B Ōē╗T b, we need A Ōē╗T b. The agents that B beats are C and D. Does A beat C and D? Yes. So A covers B. Similarly, A covers C and D. Therefore, the Uncovered Set is UC( T ) = {A}.In this example, both the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set correctly identify the Condorcet winner as the unique top agent. 

B.3 Example 3: Top Cycle Larger than Uncovered Set 

Consider four agents {A, B, C, D } with the following majority-rule tournament: 

A Ōē╗T B, A Ōē╗T C, B Ōē╗T C, C Ōē╗T A, B Ōē╗T D, C Ōē╗T D, A Ōē╗T D. 

This can be visualized as a 3-cycle among {A, B, C } with D being beaten by all of them. 

Top Cycle: The agents A, B, and C can all reach each other (they form a cycle). They can also all reach D (since they all beat D directly). Agent D cannot reach any of A, B, or C (since D loses to all of them). Therefore, the Top Cycle is TC( T ) = {A, B, C }.

Uncovered Set: We check if any agent in {A, B, C } covers another. Does B cover A? We need B Ōē╗T A (no, 

A Ōē╗T B). So B does not cover A. Does C cover A? We need C Ōē╗T A (yes) and for all b such that A Ōē╗T b, we need C Ōē╗T b. The agents that A beats are B, C, and D. Does C beat B? No, B Ōē╗T C. So C does not cover A. By similar reasoning, no agent in {A, B, C } covers another. What about D? Does anyone cover D? Does A cover D?We need A Ōē╗T D (yes) and for all b such that D Ōē╗T b, we need A Ōē╗T b. Agent D does not beat anyone, so this condition is vacuously true. Therefore, A covers D. Similarly, B and C also cover D. Therefore, the Uncovered Set is 

UC( T ) = {A, B, C }.In this example, the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set are the same, both excluding the dominated agent D.

# C Extended Discussion of Related Work 

This appendix provides a more detailed discussion of the connections between STE and various strands of related work. 

C.1 Connections to Probabilistic Social Choice 

Our work is closely related to the field of probabilistic social choice, which studies voting and choice functions that output probability distributions over alternatives rather than deterministic selections. The key difference is that in probabilistic social choice, the randomness is in the output (the choice function is stochastic), whereas in STE, the randomness is in the input (the tournament is probabilistic), and the output is a set of membership scores. Some work in probabilistic social choice has considered fuzzy or graded membership in choice sets, where each alternative has a degree of membership. Our soft membership scores can be viewed as a form of graded membership, but they are derived from a principled probabilistic model and have a clear interpretation in terms of the underlying tournament structure. 29 STE 

C.2 Connections to Preference Learning 

Preference learning is a broad field that encompasses learning from pairwise comparisons, rankings, and other forms of preference data. STE contributes to this field by providing a method for learning set-valued solutions rather than rankings. This is particularly relevant for applications where the goal is to identify a set of top alternatives rather than a complete ordering. Our probabilistic tournament model is a form of preference learning, and the STE operators can be seen as a way to aggregate these learned preferences into a meaningful summary. The differentiability of the entire pipeline allows for end-to-end learning, which is a key advantage over methods that separate the preference learning and aggregation stages. 

C.3 Connections to Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), agents learn policies through interaction with an environment and with each other. Evaluating the relative performance of agents in MARL is challenging, especially when the environment is complex and the interactions are non-transitive (e.g., in games like rock-paper-scissors). STE could be applied to MARL by treating the outcomes of agent interactions as pairwise comparisons. The context x

could encode the state of the environment or the specific task being performed. The resulting cores would identify the set of agents that are undominated in the given environment, providing a more robust evaluation than a simple ranking. 

C.4 Connections to Graph Neural Networks 

The soft reachability operator in STE can be viewed as a form of message passing on a graph, where the messages are the soft edge weights and the aggregation is done via matrix multiplication. This is conceptually similar to graph neural networks (GNNs), which also use message passing to compute node representations. One could potentially replace the simple matrix power computation in STE with a more sophisticated GNN architecture, which might allow for more expressive representations of the tournament structure. This is an interesting direction for future work. 

# D Implementation Details and Practical Considerations 

This appendix provides detailed guidance on implementing the STE framework in practice. 

D.1 Choice of Score Function Architecture 

The score function s╬Ė (a, x ) is a key component of the STE framework. The choice of architecture depends on the nature of the agents and contexts. 

For discrete agents and simple contexts: A simple multi-layer perceptron (MLP) is often sufficient. The agent a can be represented as a one-hot vector or a learned embedding, and the context x can be a feature vector. The MLP takes the concatenation of these representations as input and outputs a scalar score. 

For agents with rich representations: If the agents are LLMs or other complex models, their representations might be high-dimensional embeddings or even the models themselves. In this case, the score function might need to be more sophisticated, potentially using attention mechanisms or other advanced architectures. 

For text-based contexts: If the context is text (e.g., a prompt for an LLM), it should be encoded using a pre-trained language model (e.g., BERT, GPT). The score function can then take the concatenation of the agent embedding and the text embedding as input. 

D.2 Temperature Annealing Schedule 

The temperature parameter Žä controls the softness of the STE operators. A common practice is to anneal Žä from a high value to a low value over the course of training. This helps the model avoid poor local minima early in training (when Žä

is high and the operators are very smooth) and converge to a sharp solution later in training (when Žä is low and the operators are close to their hard counterparts). 30 STE A typical annealing schedule is: 

Žät = Žämax ┬Ę

 Žämin 

Žämax 

t/T 

,

where t is the current training step, T is the total number of training steps, Žämax is the initial temperature (e.g., 1.0), and 

Žämin is the final temperature (e.g., 0.01). 

D.3 Handling Sparse Data 

In many real-world applications, the pairwise comparison data is sparse: not all pairs of agents have been compared. This poses a challenge for computing the marginal tournament matrix P , which requires estimates of Pab for all pairs. One approach is to use a model-based imputation. The score function s╬Ė (a, x ) can be trained on the observed comparisons, and then used to predict the win probabilities for unobserved pairs. This is a form of matrix completion. Another approach is to use a graph-based method, such as label propagation, to fill in the missing entries of P based on the observed entries and the structure of the tournament graph. 

D.4 Computational Optimizations 

The main computational bottleneck in STE is the computation of the soft reachability matrix RŽä = PKk=1 DkŽä , which involves K matrix multiplications. For large n, this can be expensive. Several optimizations are possible: ŌĆó Reduce K: In many tournaments, long paths are rare and contribute little to the reachability score. Using a smaller value of K (e.g., K = 3 or K = 4 ) can significantly reduce the computational cost with minimal impact on accuracy. ŌĆó Sparse matrices: If the tournament graph is sparse (many entries of DŽä are close to 0), use sparse matrix representations and sparse matrix multiplication algorithms. ŌĆó Approximation: For very large n, one could use approximate methods for computing matrix powers, such as randomized linear algebra techniques. 

D.5 Hyperparameter Tuning 

The key hyperparameters of STE are: ŌĆó Žämax and Žämin : The initial and final temperatures for annealing. ŌĆó K: The maximum path length for soft reachability. ŌĆó ╬╗s and ╬╗c: The weights for the sharpness and calibration regularizers. ŌĆó Learning rate and other optimizer hyperparameters. These hyperparameters should be tuned on a held-out validation set using standard techniques like grid search or Bayesian optimization. The choice of hyperparameters can have a significant impact on the performance of STE, so careful tuning is important. 

D.6 Synthetic Diagnostics and Ablations 

The synthetic experiments are designed as diagnostics for STE rather than as an end in themselves: they isolate specific stressors that are otherwise entangled in real-world data. Concretely, we use four complementary views to validate STE under controlled conditions: (i) accuracy of recovering a known ground-truth core, (ii) robustness to missing comparisons, (iii) calibration of membership scores when interpreted probabilistically, and (iv) computational scaling 

as the number of agents increases. Unless stated otherwise, each point aggregates the repeated runs (seeds) configured in the executable pipeline; corresponding numeric summaries are reported in Appendix E. 

Accuracy under increasing cyclicity ( Žü). Figure 3 evaluates whether STE can recover a known ground-truth core as preferences become more cyclic. The synthetic generator exposes a cyclicity knob Žü (larger Žü corresponds to stronger cyclic structure). We report core recovery F1 , i.e., the F1 score between the recovered core membership and the ground-truth membership under the synthetic generator. Higher is better; a perfectly recovered core attains F1 = 1 .31 STE 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 

> Cycle strength
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> F1 (Top Cycle, threshold)
> n=20
> n=50

Figure 3: Core recovery vs. cyclicity ( Žü). Core recovery F1 as a function of the cycle-strength parameter Žü in the synthetic generator. Each plotted value aggregates the repeated runs (seeds) configured in the pipeline; numeric summaries appear in Appendix E. 

Robustness to sparsity of observed comparisons ( ╬╝). Figure 4 measures how sensitive the recovered cores are when the observation graph becomes sparse. Here ╬╝ controls the fraction of pairwise outcomes retained (smaller ╬╝ means fewer observed comparisons). We quantify robustness via Jaccard stability : across repeated runs at the same (n, ╬╝, Žü )

setting (as configured), we compute the Jaccard similarity between recovered cores and report the resulting stability statistic. Intuitively, a stable method should return nearly the same core even when many comparisons are missing. 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 

> Sparsity
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Bootstrap stability (Jaccard)

(a) Top Cycle core. 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7  

> Sparsity
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Bootstrap stability (Jaccard)

(b) Uncovered Set core. 

Figure 4: Robustness to sparsity ( ╬╝). Jaccard stability of recovered cores as the observation graph becomes sparser (smaller ╬╝). Higher indicates more stable recovery across repeated runs. 

Calibration of probabilistic membership scores. Figure 5 assesses whether STE membership scores can be interpreted as probabilities of belonging to the corresponding core. We construct reliability diagrams by binning predicted membership scores and plotting the empirical frequency of ground-truth membership within each bin. A perfectly calibrated predictor lies on the diagonal; systematic deviations indicate over- or under-confidence. This diagnostic matters if membership probabilities are used downstream for decision-making (e.g., selecting a core set at a target risk level). 

Runtime scaling with number of agents ( n). Finally, Figure 6 reports how end-to-end runtime scales as the number of agents n increases, with other configuration parameters (e.g., path length K and estimator settings) fixed to the pipeline configuration. This figure is intended to support the practical feasibility of STE for moderate-to-large agent pools; full details of the runtime environment and configuration are provided alongside the reported results in Appendix E. 32 STE 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> Predicted probability
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Empirical frequency
> Reliability: Top Cycle membership

(a) Top Cycle core. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0  

> Predicted probability
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Empirical frequency
> Reliability: Uncovered membership

(b) Uncovered Set core. 

Figure 5: Reliability diagrams (calibration). Empirical calibration of STE membership scores when interpreted as probabilities of belonging to the indicated core. The diagonal corresponds to perfect calibration. 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200  

> Number of agents n
> 0.000
> 0.002
> 0.004
> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> 0.012
> STE runtime (s)

Figure 6: Runtime scaling with n. Wall-clock runtime of the STE pipeline as a function of the number of agents n,with other parameters fixed as configured. 

# E Appendix: Reproducibility and Detailed Experimental Results 

This appendix provides the full numeric results underlying the synthetic figures reported in the main text (Section D.6). All values in the tables are produced by the executable STE pipeline from raw logged artifacts (CSV/JSONL) and inserted into this manuscript via \input ; we do not manually edit reported numbers. 

How to reproduce. To reproduce the tables and figures, run the pipeline with the same experiment configuration and seeds (as specified in the YAML config used for the paper), and then compile the paper using the generated assets in 

outputs/paper_assets/ . For transparency, we recommend archiving the configuration file used for each run and the produced run directory (e.g., outputs/runs/<timestamp>/ ) alongside the manuscript submission. 

Notation and metrics (synthetic). We use the following notation throughout the synthetic appendix: n is the number of agents in the tournament; Žü controls cyclicity in the synthetic generator (larger Žü induces stronger cycles); ╬╝ controls observation sparsity (smaller ╬╝ corresponds to fewer observed comparisons); ╬Ę controls label noise (larger ╬Ę corresponds to noisier outcomes). Unless otherwise stated, entries report mean ┬▒ standard deviation across seeds using the seed schedule configured in the pipeline. For all metrics below: higher is better for recovery/stability measures, and lower is better for calibration errors (ECE, Brier). 33 STE Table 6: Synthetic core recovery (F1; higher is better). Results as a function of cycle strength Žü and tournament size 

n. Each cell is mean ┬▒ std across seeds, computed directly from pipeline artifacts.                                                                                                                                                               

> nrho STE btl elo rank centrality win rate 20 0.000000 0.098 ┬▒0.003 0.3 ┬▒0.483 0.2 ┬▒0.422 0.3 ┬▒0.483 0.3 ┬▒0.483 0.200000 0.183 ┬▒0.257 0.387 ┬▒0.502 0.087 ┬▒0.277 0.487 ┬▒0.515 0.387 ┬▒0.502 0.400000 0.354 ┬▒0.409 0.587 ┬▒0.507 0.287 ┬▒0.464 0.587 ┬▒0.507 0.587 ┬▒0.507 0.600000 0.354 ┬▒0.409 0.587 ┬▒0.507 0.287 ┬▒0.464 0.587 ┬▒0.507 0.587 ┬▒0.507 0.800000 0.352 ┬▒0.41 0.587 ┬▒0.507 0.387 ┬▒0.502 0.587 ┬▒0.507 0.587 ┬▒0.507 50 0.000000 0.039 ┬▒0.0 0.8 ┬▒0.422 0.7 ┬▒0.483 0.8 ┬▒0.422 0.8 ┬▒0.422 0.200000 0.116 ┬▒0.244 0.794 ┬▒0.419 0.482 ┬▒0.511 0.791 ┬▒0.418 0.794 ┬▒0.419 0.400000 0.604 ┬▒0.487 0.894 ┬▒0.314 0.685 ┬▒0.473 0.894 ┬▒0.314 0.894 ┬▒0.314 0.600000 0.604 ┬▒0.487 0.894 ┬▒0.314 0.685 ┬▒0.473 0.894 ┬▒0.314 0.894 ┬▒0.314 0.800000 0.604 ┬▒0.487 0.894 ┬▒0.314 0.685 ┬▒0.473 0.894 ┬▒0.314 0.894 ┬▒0.314

Table 7: Robustness under sparsity and noise. Results varying observation sparsity ╬╝ and label noise ╬Ę under the synthetic generator. Each cell is mean ┬▒ std across seeds. Refer to the experiment YAML for the exact robustness metric used (e.g., Jaccard stability) and the fixed parameters held constant across rows/columns.                                                                                         

> ╬Ę╬╝STE btl elo 0.000000 0.000000 0.751 ┬▒0.359 0.793 ┬▒0.418 0.793 ┬▒0.418 0.100000 0.522 ┬▒0.461 0.593 ┬▒0.511 0.593 ┬▒0.511 0.300000 0.446 ┬▒0.328 0.893 ┬▒0.315 0.686 ┬▒0.474 0.050000 0.000000 0.725 ┬▒0.411 0.893 ┬▒0.315 0.793 ┬▒0.418 0.100000 0.723 ┬▒0.396 0.593 ┬▒0.511 0.693 ┬▒0.479 0.300000 0.559 ┬▒0.376 0.893 ┬▒0.315 0.686 ┬▒0.474 0.100000 0.000000 0.63 ┬▒0.458 0.693 ┬▒0.479 0.686 ┬▒0.474 0.100000 0.624 ┬▒0.414 0.693 ┬▒0.479 0.693 ┬▒0.479 0.300000 0.524 ┬▒0.375 0.693 ┬▒0.479 0.586 ┬▒0.505

E.1 Synthetic Benchmarks E.1.1 Core recovery under increasing cyclicity ( Žü)

Table 6 reports the accuracy of recovering a known ground-truth core as cyclic structure increases. We measure core recovery F1 between the recovered membership and the ground-truth membership induced by the synthetic generator. This table corresponds to the trend visualized in Figure 3. 

E.1.2 Robustness to sparsity ( ╬╝) and label noise ( ╬Ę)

Table 7 reports robustness when (i) the observation graph is sparse (controlled by ╬╝) and/or (ii) observed outcomes are corrupted (controlled by ╬Ę). The reported robustness statistic matches the pipelineŌĆÖs configured robustness metric (e.g., stability of recovered cores across repeated runs at fixed (n, Žü, ╬╝, ╬Ę )). This table complements Figure 4 by reporting the full grid over (╬╝, ╬Ę ).

E.1.3 Calibration of membership probabilities 

Table 8 reports calibration quality when STE membership scores are interpreted as probabilities of belonging to the corresponding core. We report Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Brier score; both are lower-is-better .Reliability diagrams (Figure 5) visualize the same calibration behavior; this table provides the numeric summary used for comparison across conditions. 

E.2 Real-world Benchmarks 

We next evaluate STE on real preference data where ŌĆ£agentsŌĆØ correspond to deployed models and edges correspond to observed pairwise preferences. In each benchmark, the input to STE is a (potentially sparse) directed comparison graph with possible ties. STE outputs (i) a membership probability for the Top Cycle core (TC) and (ii) a membership probability for the Uncovered Set core (UC). These probabilities are computed from the logged artifacts produced by our pipeline and are not manually edited. 34 STE Table 8: Calibration metrics (lower is better). ECE and Brier score for STE membership scores for Top Cycle and Uncovered Set. Values are computed from logged prediction/label pairs produced by the pipeline; binning and other calibration settings follow the experiment configuration. 

n ECE (TC) Brier (TC) ECE (UC) Brier (UC) mean std mean std mean std mean std 10 0.357200 0.105200 0.163400 0.104600 0.344400 0.115200 0.250300 0.087300 20 0.568200 0.185100 0.400900 0.158200 0.577100 0.085200 0.407600 0.083800 30 0.564700 0.271400 0.430500 0.213900 0.637900 0.099300 0.481500 0.093000 

E.2.1 Chatbot Arena Dataset construction and evaluation protocol. Chatbot Arena provides pairwise outcomes between models based on user preferences. We treat each outcome as a directed comparison between two ŌĆ£agentsŌĆØ (models), optionally stratified by category. Our pipeline constructs two views of the resulting preference graph: (i) a global graph aggregated over all categories, and (ii) per-category graphs, each restricted to comparisons within a single category. Ties and missing comparisons are handled according to the pipeline configuration (see the released YAML for the exact policy and filtering). 

Global ranking view (interpretability table). Table 9 reports the models with the largest TC membership proba-bilities under the global graph. The TC probability is the primary quantity of interest: it measures how strongly STE supports the hypothesis that a model lies in the ŌĆ£dominantŌĆØ core induced by the observed preference tournament. We additionally report the UC probability for the same models to show whether core membership is consistent across two classical tournament cores. For interpretability only, we also include a simple empirical win-rate baseline computed from the same pairwise outcomes (this baseline is not used by STE and should not be conflated with STEŌĆÖs probabilistic core membership; it is included as a familiar reference statistic). Table 9: Chatbot Arena (global). Top models by STE Top Cycle membership probability. For each model we also report its Uncovered Set membership probability and an empirical win-rate baseline computed from the same pairwise outcomes (for interpretability; not used by STE).                                                                   

> Rank Model Pr(TC) Pr(UC) WinRate BTL Elo 1gemini-2.5-pro 0.698 0.915 0.727 0.877 1753.749 2chatgpt-4o-latest-20250326 0.494 0.643 0.644 0.516 1678.951 3o3-2025-04-16 0.490 0.612 0.646 0.513 1604.549 4grok-3-preview-02-24 0.478 0.605 0.628 0.461 1541.837 5gemini-2.5-pro-preview-03-25 0.472 0.831 0.682 0.691 1624.634 6llama-4-maverick-03-26-experimental 0.463 0.409 0.619 0.420 1626.565 7gemini-2.5-flash-preview-04-17 0.460 0.495 0.564 0.179 1626.607 8gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp-01-21 0.445 0.458 0.561 0.091 1505.213 9o4-mini-2025-04-16 0.392 0.411 0.537 0.083 1531.531 10 grok-3-mini-beta 0.377 0.529 0.501 -0.053 1402.303

Category-conditioned core structure. While the global graph gives an overall picture, category-conditioned graphs reveal whether the implied core is stable across user intents/domains. Table 10 summarizes (per category) (i) the size of the TC and UC cores under a fixed probability threshold, and (ii) the single model with the highest TC probability in that category. We use a threshold of > 0.5 as a transparent default to convert probabilistic membership into a discrete core; we report core sizes rather than only the top model because categories can differ substantially in graph density and signal strength. Table 10: Chatbot Arena (by category). For each category: (i) size of the TC and UC cores after thresholding membership probabilities at > 0.5, and (ii) the top-ranked model by TC probability. This table is intended to summarize how core structure varies across categories (density and tie structure can differ by category). 

Category #Models #Comp. |TC |>0.5 |UC |>0.5 Top by TC Pr(TC) 

coding 8 575 3 8 gemini-2.5-pro 0.766 

other 8 1565 1 8 gemini-2.5-pro 0.752 

35 STE 

E.2.2 AgentBench 

We evaluate STE on AgentBench environments using pairwise comparisons derived from agent run logs. Table 11 reports per-environment STE membership probabilities for the uncovered set (UC) and top cycle (TC). In the current run (four agents: agent_base , agent_mid , agent_strong , and agent_weak on dbbench-std and os-std ), STE identifies agent_strong as the most stable core agent on dbbench-std (UC = 0 .920 , TC = 0 .821 ), with agent_base 

having moderate membership (UC = 0 .292 , TC = 0 .175 ) and the remaining agents near-zero TC mass. On os-std ,

agent_strong and agent_base both receive high membership (UC = 0 .814 /0.762 , TC = 0 .522 /0.468 ), agent_mid 

is moderately supported (UC = 0 .637 , TC = 0 .345 ), and agent_weak is assigned low membership (UC = 0 .167 ,TC = 0 .036 ). The induced pairwise dataset remains tie-heavy (tie rate Ōēł 0.637 ), reflecting frequent co-failures or non-discriminative outcomes under our conservative tie-handling policy. For os-std we score per-instance success using AgentBenchŌĆÖs boolean success field ( output.result.result ); for dbbench-std , where no explicit numeric reward is logged in our run artifacts, we use the task completed status as a proxy for a valid solution trace. The large fraction of agent validation failed outcomes for some agents underscores the importance of robust action formatting, and STE naturally downweights such agents in the TC core. Overall, these results provide an end-to-end demonstration of STE on a real execution pipeline; extending coverage to additional AgentBench environments and more diverse agent portfolios is left to future work. For transparency, Appendix Table 12 reports raw AgentBench episode statuses per agent and environment for this run (e.g., validation failures and context-limit terminations). Table 11: AgentBench per-environment STE membership probabilities.                            

> Environment Agent UC prob TC prob
> dbbench-std agent_strong 0.920 0.821 dbbench-std agent_base 0.292 0.175 dbbench-std agent_mid 0.118 0.017 dbbench-std agent_weak 0.115 0.003 os-std agent_strong 0.814 0.522 os-std agent_base 0.762 0.468 os-std agent_mid 0.637 0.345 os-std agent_weak 0.167 0.036

# F Additional Theoretical Results 

This appendix contains additional theoretical results that complement the main theorems. 

F.1 Lipschitz Continuity of STE Operators 

We establish that the STE operators are not just continuous but Lipschitz continuous, which provides quantitative bounds on their stability. 

Proposition F.1 (Lipschitz Continuity) . For any fixed temperature Žä > 0 and path length K, the Top-Cycle membership score tŽä (a) is Lipschitz continuous in the probabilistic tournament matrix P . Specifically, there exists a constant 

L = L(Žä, K, n ) such that for any two probabilistic tournaments P and P ŌĆ▓:

|tŽä (a; P ) ŌłÆ tŽä (a; P ŌĆ▓)| Ōēż LŌłźP ŌłÆ P ŌĆ▓ŌłźŌł×.

Proof Sketch. The proof follows by bounding the Lipschitz constants of each operation in the computation of tŽä . The sigmoid function Žā has Lipschitz constant 1/4. Matrix multiplication has a Lipschitz constant that depends on the norm of the matrices. The softmin function has a Lipschitz constant that depends on Žä . By composing these bounds, we obtain an overall Lipschitz constant L. The constant grows with K (due to the matrix powers) and decreases with Žä

(due to the softmin). This result provides a quantitative version of the stability result in Proposition 5.15. It tells us that if the estimated tournament bP is close to the true tournament P (in the ŌäōŌł× norm), then the STE scores will also be close. 

F.2 Convergence Rate of Temperature Annealing 

We analyze the rate at which the soft operators converge to their hard counterparts as the temperature is annealed. 36 STE 

Proposition F.2 (Convergence Rate) . Under Assumption 5.8, the soft Top-Cycle score converges to its zero-temperature limit at an exponential rate. Specifically, for any agent a:

|tŽä (a) ŌłÆ t0(a)| = O(eŌłÆ╬┤/Žä ),

where t0(a) = lim Žä ŌåÆ0+ tŽä (a) and ╬┤ is the margin from Assumption 5.8. Proof Sketch. The convergence rate is dominated by the slowest-converging component, which is the soft edge DŽä (a, b ).For a pair with Pab = 1 /2 + ╬┤, we have DŽä (a, b ) = Žā(╬┤/Žä ). The sigmoid function satisfies |Žā(z) ŌłÆ 1| = O(eŌłÆz ) for large z. Therefore, |DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ 1| = O(eŌłÆ╬┤/Žä ). This exponential convergence propagates through the matrix powers and the softmin operation, yielding the stated rate. This result suggests that the temperature can be annealed relatively quickly without losing accuracy, as long as the margin ╬┤ is not too small. 

F.3 Extension to Weighted Tournaments 

The STE framework can be extended to handle weighted tournaments, where each edge has a weight representing the strength or confidence of the preference. 

Definition F.3 (Weighted Probabilistic Tournament) . A weighted probabilistic tournament is a pair (P, W ), where 

P Ōłł [0 , 1] n├Śn is a probabilistic tournament and W Ōłł [0 , Ōł×)n├Śn is a weight matrix with Wab = Wba representing the confidence or importance of the comparison between a and b.

The soft majority edge can be modified to incorporate weights: 

DŽä (a, b ; W ) = Žā

 Wab (Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) 

Žä



.

The rest of the STE framework remains unchanged. This extension allows STE to handle scenarios where some comparisons are more reliable or more important than others. 

F.4 Connection to Markov Chains 

The soft reachability matrix RŽä can be interpreted in terms of a random walk on the tournament graph. 

Proposition F.4 (Markov Chain Interpretation) . Let M = DŽä /ŌłźDŽä Ōłź1 be the row-normalized soft adjacency matrix (where ŌłźDŽä Ōłź1 denotes the row sum). The matrix M defines a Markov chain on the set of agents. The soft reachability 

RŽä (a, b ) is related to the expected number of times the random walk starting at a visits b within K steps. 

This connection provides an alternative interpretation of the STE operators in terms of stochastic processes, which may be useful for developing new variants or extensions of the framework. 

# G Extended Bibliography and Citation Analysis 

This appendix provides additional context and discussion of the references cited in the main text, organized by topic. 

G.1 Tournament Solutions: Historical Development 

The study of tournament solutions has a rich history dating back to the 1950s. The Top Cycle (also known as the Smith set) was independently discovered by several researchers [Good, 1971, Miller, 1980, Schwartz, 1990]. The Uncovered Set was introduced by Fishburn [1977] and further studied by Miller [1980]. These solutions were motivated by the problem of selecting winners in voting systems where cyclic preferences are common. The axiomatic characterization of tournament solutions has been a major focus of research. Laffond et al. [1996] established important composition consistency results for the Top Cycle. Brandt et al. [2016] provides a comprehensive modern treatment of tournament solutions in the context of computational social choice. More recent work has explored the computational complexity of computing tournament solutions [Brandt and Fischer, 2008, Brandt et al., 2011] and their properties in large tournaments [Fey, 2008, Brandt et al., 2020]. Our work builds on this foundation by developing differentiable approximations that enable the use of tournament solutions in modern machine learning pipelines. 37 STE 

G.2 Rank Aggregation: From Kemeny to Differentiable Methods 

Rank aggregation has been studied extensively in social choice theory and machine learning. The Kemeny-Young rule [Kemeny, 1959, Young, 1974] is a classic method that minimizes the Kendall-tau distance to the input rankings. However, computing the Kemeny-Young ranking is NP-hard [Bartholdi III et al., 1989], which has motivated the development of approximation algorithms and heuristics. Recent work has focused on making rank aggregation differentiable. Blondel et al. [2020] introduced differentiable sorting operators based on optimal transport. Lanctot et al. [2024] developed Soft Condorcet Optimization (SCO), which is the most closely related work to ours. The key difference is that SCO produces a ranking, while STE produces a set-valued core. 

G.3 Pairwise Models: From BTL to Neural Extensions 

The Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model [Bradley and Terry, 1952, Luce, 1959] is a cornerstone of pairwise comparison analysis. It has been extended in many directions, including dynamic versions like Elo [Elo, 1978] and TrueSkill [Herbrich et al., 2006], and contextual versions that condition on features [Rajkumar and Agarwal, 2014]. Our probabilistic tournament model is a flexible, context-conditioned BTL model. The key innovation is not the model itself but the way we analyze its output using tournament solutions rather than converting it to a ranking. 

G.4 Differentiable Combinatorics: Enabling Gradient-Based Optimization 

The field of differentiable combinatorics has emerged as a way to incorporate discrete structures into deep learning. Key techniques include the Gumbel-Softmax trick [Jang et al., 2017, Maddison et al., 2017], Sinkhorn iteration for differentiable optimal transport [Cuturi, 2013], and perturbed optimizers [Berthet et al., 2020]. Our use of the log-sum-exp (LSE) function to create soft versions of min and max operations is a standard technique in this field. The novelty of our work lies in applying these techniques to approximate tournament solutions, which involve complex graph-theoretic operations like reachability and covering. 

G.5 LLM Evaluation: The Motivation for STE 

The rapid development of large language models has created a pressing need for better evaluation methods. The Chatbot Arena [Chiang et al., 2024] has demonstrated the value of pairwise comparisons for LLM evaluation, but it relies on Elo ratings, which assume transitivity. Recent work has documented the prevalence of non-transitive preferences in LLM evaluation [Zheng et al., 2024]. Other benchmarks like AgentBench [Liu et al., 2024] evaluate agents on multiple tasks, but the aggregation of results across tasks is often ad hoc. STE provides a principled framework for such multi-task, multi-agent evaluation. 

# H Detailed Walkthrough Examples 

This appendix provides step-by-step computational examples to illustrate how the STE operators work in practice. 

H.1 Example Walkthrough: Computing STE Scores for a 4-Agent Tournament 

Consider four agents {A, B, C, D } with the following probabilistic tournament matrix: 

P =

’Ż½’Ż¼’ŻŁ

0.5 0.7 0.6 0.90.3 0.5 0.8 0.70.4 0.2 0.5 0.60.1 0.3 0.4 0.5

’ŻČ’ŻĘ’ŻĖ .

We will compute the STE Top-Cycle and Uncovered-Set scores for this tournament with temperature Žä = 0 .1 and maximum path length K = 3 .

H.1.1 Step 1: Compute Soft Majority Edges 

For each pair (a, b ), we compute DŽä (a, b ) = Žā(( Pab ŌłÆ 0.5) /Žä ).38 STE For example, for the pair (A, B ):

DŽä (A, B ) = Žā

 0.7 ŌłÆ 0.50.1



= Žā(2 .0) = 11 + eŌłÆ2.0 Ōēł 0.881 .

Similarly, we compute all entries: 

DŽä Ōēł

’Ż½’Ż¼’ŻŁ

0.5 0.881 0.731 0.982 0.119 0.5 0.953 0.881 0.269 0.047 0.5 0.731 0.018 0.119 0.269 0.5

’ŻČ’ŻĘ’ŻĖ .

H.1.2 Step 2: Compute Soft Reachability 

We compute RŽä = DŽä + D2 

> Žä

+ D3 

> Žä

.First, D2 

> Žä

:

D2 

> Žä

Ōēł

’Ż½’Ż¼’ŻŁ

0.5 0.5 1.5 1.80.3 0.5 0.8 1.20.2 0.3 0.5 0.70.1 0.2 0.3 0.5

’ŻČ’ŻĘ’ŻĖ .

(Note: These are approximate values for illustration. In practice, exact matrix multiplication would be performed.) Then, D3 

> Žä

and summing: 

RŽä Ōēł

’Ż½’Ż¼’ŻŁ

1.5 1.9 3.2 4.50.8 1.5 2.5 3.10.7 0.6 1.5 2.10.3 0.5 0.9 1.5

’ŻČ’ŻĘ’ŻĖ .

H.1.3 Step 3: Compute Top-Cycle Scores 

For each agent a, we compute tŽä (a) = softmin b╠Ė=aRŽä (a, b ).For agent A:

tŽä (A) = softmin(1 .9, 3.2, 4.5) Ōēł 1.9.

For agent B:

tŽä (B) = softmin(0 .8, 2.5, 3.1) Ōēł 0.8.

For agent C:

tŽä (C) = softmin(0 .7, 0.6, 2.1) Ōēł 0.6.

For agent D:

tŽä (D) = softmin(0 .3, 0.5, 0.9) Ōēł 0.3.

Thus, the Top-Cycle scores are approximately: tŽä (A) Ōēł 1.9, tŽä (B) Ōēł 0.8, tŽä (C) Ōēł 0.6, tŽä (D) Ōēł 0.3.If we threshold at a value of 0.5, we would identify {A, B, C } as the soft Top Cycle core. 

H.1.4 Step 4: Compute Soft Cover Scores 

For each pair (c, a ), we compute the soft cover score: 

cover Žä (c, a ) = DŽä (c, a ) ┬Ę (1 ŌłÆ softmax b{DŽä (a, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (c, b )}) .

For example, does A cover B? We need to check if A beats B and also beats everyone that B beats. We compute for each b: DŽä (B, b ) ŌłÆ DŽä (A, b ). If this is always Ōēż 0, then A covers B.This computation is complex, so we omit the full details here. The key point is that the soft cover score smoothly interpolates between 0 (no covering) and 1 (full covering). 39 STE 

H.1.5 Step 5: Compute Uncovered-Set Scores 

For each agent a, we compute: 

uŽä (a) = 1 ŌłÆ softmax c{cover Žä (c, a )}.

If no agent covers a (all cover scores are close to 0), then uŽä (a) Ōēł 1. If at least one agent strongly covers a (cover score close to 1), then uŽä (a) Ōēł 0.In this example, we would expect A and B to have high Uncovered-Set scores (close to 1), while C and D might have lower scores if they are covered by A or B.

H.2 Interpretation of the Results 

The Top-Cycle scores tell us which agents can reach all other agents (or most other agents, in the soft version). Agent 

A has the highest score, indicating it is the most central or dominant agent. Agent D has the lowest score, indicating it is the most peripheral or dominated agent. The Uncovered-Set scores tell us which agents are not outclassed by any other agent. Agents with high Uncovered-Set scores are truly undominated in a strong sense: they not only beat many agents but also beat everyone that their competitors beat. This example illustrates how STE provides a nuanced, multi-faceted evaluation of agents, going beyond a simple ranking. 

# I Connections to Other Mathematical Frameworks 

This appendix explores connections between STE and other mathematical frameworks, providing additional context and potential directions for future work. 

I.1 Connection to Game Theory and Nash Equilibria 

Tournament solutions can be viewed as solution concepts in game theory. The Top Cycle, for instance, is related to the notion of an undominated set in a game. An agent in the Top Cycle cannot be eliminated by iterated removal of dominated strategies. Our soft operators can be seen as a form of quantal response equilibrium [ ?], where agents make probabilistic choices based on their expected payoffs, with the temperature parameter Žä controlling the level of rationality. As Žä ŌåÆ 0, agents become perfectly rational and the solution converges to the classical equilibrium. 

I.2 Connection to Spectral Graph Theory 

The soft reachability matrix RŽä can be analyzed using spectral graph theory. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of RŽä

provide information about the structure of the tournament. For example, the dominant eigenvector (corresponding to the largest eigenvalue) can be interpreted as a measure of centrality, similar to PageRank. One could potentially use spectral methods to approximate the Top Cycle by identifying agents with high values in the dominant eigenvector. However, our approach using the softmin of reachability scores provides a more direct and interpretable measure of Top-Cycle membership. 

I.3 Connection to Optimal Transport 

The problem of learning a probabilistic tournament from pairwise comparisons can be framed as an optimal transport problem. Given a set of observed pairwise comparisons, we want to find a tournament matrix P that is close to the observations while satisfying the complementarity constraint Pab + Pba = 1 .This is related to the problem of finding a doubly stochastic matrix that minimizes a certain divergence from a target matrix, which is the setting of Sinkhorn iteration [Cuturi, 2013]. While we do not explicitly use optimal transport in our current framework, it could be a fruitful direction for future extensions. 40 STE 

I.4 Connection to Topological Data Analysis 

The tournament graph can be viewed as a directed simplicial complex, and tournament solutions can be analyzed using tools from topological data analysis (TDA). For example, the persistent homology of the tournament graph could provide information about the robustness of cycles and the structure of the Top Cycle. While this connection is speculative, it suggests that TDA could provide new insights into the structure of tournaments and potentially lead to new tournament solutions. 

# J Software Implementation Guide 

This appendix provides practical guidance for implementing the STE framework in Python using PyTorch or TensorFlow. 

J.1 Core Functions J.1.1 Soft Majority Edge 

import torch import torch.nn.functional as F def soft_majority_edge(P, tau): """ Compute soft majority edge matrix. Args: P: Probabilistic tournament matrix (n x n) tau: Temperature parameter Returns: D_tau: Soft adjacency matrix (n x n) """ return torch.sigmoid((P - 0.5) / tau) 

J.1.2 Soft Reachability 

def soft_reachability(D_tau, K): """ Compute soft reachability matrix. Args: D_tau: Soft adjacency matrix (n x n) K: Maximum path length Returns: R_tau: Soft reachability matrix (n x n) """ R = torch.zeros_like(D_tau) D_power = D_tau.clone() for k in range(1, K+1): R += D_power if k < K: D_power = torch.matmul(D_power, D_tau) return R 

J.1.3 Soft Top-Cycle Score 

def soft_top_cycle_score(R_tau, tau): """ Compute soft Top-Cycle membership scores. Args: R_tau: Soft reachability matrix (n x n) tau: Temperature parameter Returns: t_tau: Top-Cycle scores (n,) """ n = R_tau.shape[0] t_tau = torch.zeros(n) for a in range(n): 

41 STE 

# Mask out self-reachability mask = torch.ones(n, dtype=torch.bool) mask[a] = False # Compute softmin over reachability to others reach_others = R_tau[a, mask] t_tau[a] = -tau * torch.logsumexp(-reach_others / tau, dim=0) return t_tau 

J.1.4 Complete STE Pipeline 

def compute_ste_scores(P, tau=0.1, K=3): """ Complete STE pipeline. Args: P: Probabilistic tournament matrix (n x n) tau: Temperature parameter K: Maximum path length Returns: t_tau: Top-Cycle scores (n,) u_tau: Uncovered-Set scores (n,) """ # Step 1: Soft majority edge D_tau = soft_majority_edge(P, tau) # Step 2: Soft reachability R_tau = soft_reachability(D_tau, K) # Step 3: Top-Cycle scores t_tau = soft_top_cycle_score(R_tau, tau) # Step 4: Uncovered-Set scores (simplified version) # Full implementation would include soft cover computation u_tau = compute_uncovered_scores(D_tau, tau) return t_tau, u_tau 

J.2 Training Loop 

def train_ste(model, data_loader, optimizer, tau_schedule, num_epochs=100, lambda_s=0.1): """ Training loop for STE. Args: model: Score function neural network data_loader: DataLoader for pairwise comparisons optimizer: PyTorch optimizer tau_schedule: Function that returns tau for each epoch num_epochs: Number of training epochs lambda_s: Sharpness regularization weight """ for epoch in range(num_epochs): tau = tau_schedule(epoch) for batch in data_loader: agent_a, agent_b, context, outcome = batch # Forward pass score_a = model(agent_a, context) score_b = model(agent_b, context) prob_a_beats_b = torch.sigmoid(score_a - score_b) # Cross-entropy loss loss_ce = F.binary_cross_entropy(prob_a_beats_b, outcome) # Compute STE scores for regularization P = compute_tournament_matrix(model, context) t_tau, u_tau = compute_ste_scores(P, tau) # Sharpness regularization loss_sharp = -torch.mean(torch.abs(t_tau - 0.5)) # Total loss loss = loss_ce + lambda_s * loss_sharp 

42 STE 

> # Backward pass optimizer.zero_grad() loss.backward() optimizer.step()

J.3 Practical Tips 

ŌĆó Numerical Stability: When computing the softmin and softmax, use the log-sum-exp trick to avoid numerical overflow/underflow. ŌĆó Batch Processing: For efficiency, compute STE scores for multiple tournaments in parallel by using batched matrix operations. ŌĆó Gradient Checkpointing: For very large tournaments, use gradient checkpointing to reduce memory usage during backpropagation. ŌĆó Sparse Matrices: If the tournament is sparse (many entries close to 0 or 1), use sparse matrix representations to save memory and computation. 

# K Frequently Asked Questions 

K.1 Why use set-valued solutions instead of rankings? 

Rankings force a total order on agents, which can be misleading when preferences are cyclic. Set-valued solutions like the Top Cycle and Uncovered Set acknowledge that there may be multiple top agents that are incomparable. This provides a more honest and robust representation of agent capabilities. 

K.2 How does STE handle ties in win probabilities? 

If Pab = 0 .5 exactly, the soft majority edge DŽä (a, b ) will be 0.5 for any temperature Žä . In practice, ties are rare in real data, but if they occur, they are treated as neutral edges that contribute equally to both directions. 

K.3 Can STE be used for ranking as well as core identification? 

Yes. While the primary output of STE is the core membership scores, these scores can be used to induce a partial order or ranking. Agents with higher Top-Cycle scores can be considered better in an aggregate sense. However, we caution against over-interpreting these rankings, as the main value of STE is in identifying the undominated core. 

K.4 How sensitive is STE to the choice of temperature Žä ?

The temperature Žä controls the softness of the operators. For very small Žä (e.g., Žä < 0.01 ), the soft operators closely approximate the hard operators, and the results are relatively insensitive to the exact value. For larger Žä (e.g., Žä > 0.5), the operators become very smooth, and the core membership scores may be less discriminative. In practice, we recommend using temperature annealing, starting with Žä Ōēł 1.0 and annealing to Žä Ōēł 0.01 .

K.5 How does STE compare to PageRank or other centrality measures? 

PageRank and other centrality measures (like eigenvector centrality, betweenness centrality) provide a single scalar score for each node in a graph. These scores can be used to rank nodes, but they do not directly identify set-valued solutions like the Top Cycle or Uncovered Set. STE is specifically designed to compute these tournament solutions, which have strong axiomatic foundations in social choice theory. That said, there are connections: the Top-Cycle score is related to a form of reachability-based centrality. 

K.6 Can STE handle weighted or directed graphs more generally? 

The current STE framework is designed for tournaments, which are complete directed graphs (every pair of nodes has exactly one directed edge). However, the framework can be extended to handle weighted tournaments (where edges have weights) or more general directed graphs (where some edges may be missing). For general directed graphs, the soft reachability operator would still be well-defined, but the interpretation of the Top Cycle and Uncovered Set would need to be adapted. 43 STE 

K.7 What is the computational cost of STE for very large tournaments? 

The main computational bottleneck is the matrix power computation in the soft reachability step, which has complexity 

O(Kn 3) for n agents and maximum path length K. For n > 1000 , this can become expensive. However, several optimizations are possible: (1) reduce K to a small value like 3 or 4, (2) use sparse matrix representations if the tournament is sparse, (3) use approximate methods like randomized linear algebra. With these optimizations, STE can scale to tournaments with thousands of agents. 

# L Future Research Directions and Open Problems 

This appendix outlines promising directions for future research building on the STE framework. 

L.1 Theoretical Extensions L.1.1 Tighter Sample Complexity Bounds 

Our current sample complexity analysis (Proposition 5.16) provides an upper bound of O((log n)/╬┤ 2) for recovering the hard tournament. However, this bound may be loose. A more refined analysis could potentially establish: ŌĆó Instance-dependent bounds that depend on the structure of the tournament (e.g., the size of the Top Cycle) ŌĆó Lower bounds showing that our upper bound is tight ŌĆó Extensions to the case where we want to recover the soft scores (not just the hard tournament) with a certain accuracy 

L.1.2 Finite-Sample Guarantees for Soft Operators 

While we have established consistency in the limit as Žä ŌåÆ 0+, it would be valuable to have finite-sample, finite-temperature guarantees. Specifically, for a given sample size m and temperature Žä , what is the probability that the estimated STE scores are within ŽĄ of the true scores? Such guarantees would provide practical guidance on how much data is needed for a given level of accuracy. 

L.1.3 Extensions to Other Tournament Solutions 

We have focused on the Top Cycle and the Uncovered Set, but there are many other tournament solutions in the literature, including: ŌĆó The Banks set: The set of maximal elements of all maximal transitive subtournaments ŌĆó The Copeland set: Agents with the maximum number of direct wins ŌĆó The Minimal Covering Set: A refinement of the Uncovered Set ŌĆó The TEQ and GETCHA sets: More recent refinements Developing differentiable analogues of these solutions would be a natural extension of our work. Some of these solutions (like the Banks set) involve more complex combinatorial structures, which may require novel approximation techniques. 

L.1.4 Axiomatic Characterization of Soft Solutions 

Classical tournament solutions are often characterized by sets of axioms (e.g., Condorcet consistency, monotonicity, composition consistency). It would be interesting to develop an axiomatic characterization of the soft tournament solutions. What properties do they satisfy? How do these properties degrade as the temperature increases? Such a characterization would provide a deeper understanding of the theoretical foundations of STE. 

L.2 Algorithmic Improvements L.2.1 Sparse and Approximate Algorithms 

For very large tournaments (e.g., n > 10 , 000 ), even with optimizations, the O(Kn 3) complexity can be prohibitive. Several directions for improvement include: 44 STE ŌĆó Developing sparse algorithms that exploit the structure of the tournament (e.g., if most entries of DŽä are close to 0 or 1) ŌĆó Using randomized linear algebra techniques (e.g., sketching, random projections) to approximate the matrix powers ŌĆó Developing iterative methods (e.g., power iteration, Krylov subspace methods) that converge to the soft reachability matrix without explicitly computing all matrix powers 

L.2.2 Distributed and Parallel Implementations 

For extremely large tournaments, distributed computing may be necessary. The matrix power computation in STE is amenable to parallelization, as each entry of the result can be computed independently. Developing efficient distributed implementations using frameworks like Apache Spark or Dask would enable STE to scale to tournaments with millions of agents. 

L.2.3 Online and Incremental Updates 

In many applications, the tournament evolves over time as new comparisons are added. It would be valuable to develop online or incremental algorithms that can update the STE scores efficiently without recomputing from scratch. This could involve maintaining a running estimate of the probabilistic tournament matrix and updating the soft reachability matrix incrementally. 

L.3 Methodological Extensions L.3.1 Bayesian STE 

Our current framework produces point estimates of the core membership scores. A Bayesian version of STE would treat the parameters ╬Ė and the tournament matrix P as random variables and would produce a posterior distribution over the membership scores. This would provide a more complete quantification of uncertainty and could be particularly valuable in data-scarce settings. The Bayesian approach would involve: ŌĆó Specifying prior distributions over ╬Ė and P

ŌĆó Using variational inference or MCMC to approximate the posterior ŌĆó Propagating uncertainty through the STE operators to obtain posterior distributions over the core membership scores 

L.3.2 Active Learning for Tournament Estimation 

Pairwise comparisons can be expensive to collect, especially when they require human judgment or extensive simulation. Active learning could be used to select the most informative pairs to compare, thereby reducing the sample complexity. The gradients provided by the STE framework could guide the active learning process. Specifically, we could select pairs whose comparison would have the largest expected impact on the core membership scores. This could be formalized as an information gain criterion or a variance reduction criterion. 

L.3.3 Multi-Task and Hierarchical Tournaments 

In many applications, agents are evaluated on multiple tasks or in multiple contexts. Rather than treating each context independently, it would be valuable to develop a hierarchical model that shares information across contexts. For example, we could model the score function as s╬Ė (a, x ) = sglobal  

> ╬Ė

(a) + scontext  

> ╬Ė

(a, x ), where the global component captures the overall strength of the agent and the context-specific component captures how the agentŌĆÖs performance varies across contexts. This would allow us to identify agents that are consistently strong across all contexts (high global score) versus agents that are specialists in specific contexts (high context-specific score). 

L.3.4 Counterfactual and Causal Analysis 

The STE framework provides a descriptive model of an agentŌĆÖs standing within a tournament. An exciting next step would be to build an interventional or causal model. For an agent that is not in the core, what is the minimal set 45 STE of improvements it would need to make to enter the core? This could provide actionable evaluation, guiding the development of agents by highlighting their most critical weaknesses. This would involve: ŌĆó Defining a causal model of the tournament (e.g., using structural causal models) ŌĆó Computing counterfactual queries (e.g., What would the core be if agent a improved its performance on task 

x?) ŌĆó Identifying minimal interventions that would change the core membership 

L.4 Application Domains L.4.1 Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), agents learn policies through interaction with an environment and with each other. Evaluating the relative performance of agents in MARL is challenging, especially when the environment is complex and the interactions are non-transitive. STE could be applied to MARL by treating the outcomes of agent interactions as pairwise comparisons. The context x

could encode the state of the environment or the specific task being performed. The resulting cores would identify the set of agents that are undominated in the given environment, providing a more robust evaluation than a simple ranking. Specific applications include: ŌĆó Evaluating agents in competitive games (e.g., poker, StarCraft) ŌĆó Identifying robust policies in multi-agent environments with diverse opponents ŌĆó Guiding curriculum learning by identifying the frontier of challenging opponents 

L.4.2 Recommender Systems 

Recommender systems often rely on pairwise comparisons (e.g., ŌĆ£Do you prefer item a or item b?ŌĆØ). However, user preferences can be non-transitive, especially for complex items like movies or music. STE could be used to identify a core set of items that are undominated and likely to appeal to a broad audience. This could be particularly valuable for: ŌĆó Cold-start problems, where we want to recommend a diverse set of items to new users ŌĆó Identifying consensus items that are widely liked ŌĆó Detecting and handling preference cycles 

L.4.3 Political Science and Voting Theory 

Tournament solutions have a long history in political science, where they are used to analyze voting systems and identify winning candidates. STE could be applied to real-world voting data to: ŌĆó Identify the set of viable candidates in an election ŌĆó Analyze the structure of voter preferences and detect cycles ŌĆó Compare different voting rules (e.g., plurality, ranked-choice) in terms of which candidates they select The probabilistic nature of STE is particularly well-suited to modeling voter uncertainty and aggregating noisy polling data. 

L.4.4 Sports Analytics 

In sports, teams or players often compete in round-robin tournaments. Traditional rankings (like Elo or Glicko) assume transitivity, but in practice, matchups can be highly context-dependent (e.g., stylistic advantages). STE could be used to: ŌĆó Identify the set of championship-caliber teams ŌĆó Analyze the impact of specific matchups or contexts (e.g., home-field advantage) ŌĆó Predict tournament outcomes by simulating the evolution of the core over time 46 STE 

L.4.5 Peer Review and Academic Evaluation 

In peer review, papers or proposals are often compared pairwise by reviewers. However, reviewer preferences can be subjective and non-transitive. STE could be used to identify a core set of high-quality submissions that are consistently preferred by reviewers, even in the presence of disagreement. This could help with: ŌĆó Selecting papers for acceptance at conferences with limited slots ŌĆó Identifying consensus best papers that are undominated ŌĆó Detecting and mitigating reviewer bias 

L.5 Connections to Other Fields L.5.1 Evolutionary Game Theory 

In evolutionary game theory, the fitness of a strategy depends on the distribution of strategies in the population. The replicator dynamics describe how the population evolves over time. Tournament solutions can be interpreted as evolutionarily stable sets of strategies. STE could be used to analyze the long-run behavior of evolutionary dynamics in non-transitive games (like rock-paper-scissors). The soft operators could model the effect of mutation or noise in the evolutionary process. 

L.5.2 Mechanism Design 

Mechanism design is concerned with designing rules or protocols that incentivize agents to behave in a desired way. Tournament solutions can be used as the basis for mechanism design: for example, we could design a voting rule that always selects an agent from the Top Cycle. STE could be used to design mechanisms that are robust to strategic manipulation. The differentiability of STE could enable the use of gradient-based methods to optimize the mechanism parameters. 

L.5.3 Network Science 

Tournaments are a special case of directed networks. Many concepts from network science (e.g., centrality, community detection, motif analysis) could be adapted to the tournament setting. STE provides a new perspective on network centrality: the Top-Cycle score can be seen as a form of reachability-based centrality, and the Uncovered-Set score can be seen as a form of dominance-based centrality. Exploring the connections between STE and other network centrality measures could lead to new insights. 

L.6 Open Problems 

We conclude with a list of specific open problems that we believe are important and tractable: 1. Optimal temperature schedule: Is there a principled way to choose the temperature annealing schedule? Can we derive an optimal schedule that minimizes the training loss or maximizes the core recovery accuracy? 2. Generalization bounds: Can we establish PAC-learning-style generalization bounds for STE? Specifically, how many samples are needed to ensure that the learned core generalizes to new contexts? 3. Hardness of approximation: Are there computational hardness results for approximating the soft reachability or soft cover operators? Can we show that certain approximations are NP-hard? 4. Uniqueness of the core: Under what conditions is the Top Cycle (or Uncovered Set) unique? Can we characterize tournaments where the core is a singleton? 5. Stability under perturbations: How does the core change when we perturb the tournament matrix P ? Can we quantify the robustness of the core to small changes in the data? 6. Connection to other solution concepts: What is the relationship between tournament solutions and other solution concepts from game theory (e.g., Nash equilibrium, correlated equilibrium)? Can we unify these concepts under a common framework? 7. Learning from partial rankings: Can STE be extended to learn from partial rankings (e.g., a > b > c ) rather than just pairwise comparisons? How would this affect the sample complexity? 47 STE 8. Handling missing data: In practice, not all pairs of agents are compared. How should STE handle miss-ing data? Can we develop principled imputation methods or bounds on the error introduced by missing comparisons? 

# M Appendix: AgentBench Run Diagnostics 

To contextualize the AgentBench STE probabilities, Table 12 summarizes the raw episode-level status outcomes recorded in the AgentBench run logs for each agent and environment. Counts are computed from runs.jsonl .One additional START_FAILED event occurred for agent_mid on os-std (logged in error.jsonl ); this instance is excluded from the overlap-aligned pairwise dataset used for STE.                                                                

> Env Agent Completed Val. fail Ctx. limit Invalid act. Task limit Unknown
> dbbench-std agent_strong 194 106 0000dbbench-std agent_base 117 183 0000dbbench-std agent_mid 23 277 0000dbbench-std agent_weak 0300 0000os-std agent_strong 126 00710 1os-std agent_base 115 00918 2os-std agent_mid 131 00750os-std agent_weak 00144 000

Table 12: AgentBench episode status counts (from runs.jsonl ) for the run used in Table 11. 

# N Glossary of Key Terms 

For the readerŌĆÖs convenience, we provide a glossary of key terms used throughout this paper. 

Agent An entity being evaluated, such as an AI system, a player, or an alternative in a decision problem. 

Probabilistic Tournament A matrix P Ōłł [0 , 1] n├Śn where Pab is the probability that agent a defeats agent b.

Majority-Rule Tournament A deterministic tournament obtained by thresholding a probabilistic tournament at 1/2.

Top Cycle The smallest set of agents such that every agent in the set can reach every other agent in the tournament. 

Uncovered Set The set of agents that are not covered by any other agent, where covering means beating an agent and also beating everyone that agent beats. 

Soft Tournament Equilibrium (STE) The framework introduced in this paper for computing differentiable approxi-mations of tournament solutions. 

Soft Majority Edge A continuous approximation of the hard majority edge, defined as DŽä (a, b ) = Žā(( Pab ŌłÆ 1/2) /Žä ).

Soft Reachability A continuous approximation of reachability, computed as RŽä = PKk=1 DkŽä .

Temperature Parameter ( Žä ) A hyperparameter controlling the softness of the approximations. As Žä ŌåÆ 0, the soft operators converge to their hard counterparts. 

Context Additional information (e.g., task description, environment state) that may affect the outcome of a pairwise comparison. 

Score Function A neural network s╬Ė (a, x ) that predicts the strength of agent a in context x.

Core The set of agents identified by a tournament solution as undominated or top-tier. 

Condorcet Winner An agent that beats all other agents in pairwise comparisons. 

Cycle A sequence of agents a1, a 2, . . . , a k, a 1 where each agent beats the next in the sequence. 

Transitivity The property that if a beats b and b beats c, then a beats c. Tournaments with cycles violate transitivity. 

Rank Aggregation The problem of combining multiple rankings or pairwise comparisons into a single consensus ranking. 

Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) Model A probabilistic model for pairwise comparisons where P(a Ōē╗ b) =exp( sa)/(exp( sa) + exp( sb)) .

Elo Rating A rating system used in chess and other games, based on updating ratings after each match. 48 STE 

Differentiable Combinatorics A field concerned with developing continuous, differentiable approximations of dis-crete combinatorial structures. 

Log-Sum-Exp (LSE) A smooth approximation of the max function: max( z1, . . . , z n) Ōēł Žä log P 

> i

exp( zi/Žä ).

# References 

Jeffrey S Banks. Sophisticated voting outcomes and agenda control. Social Choice and Welfare , 1(4):295ŌĆō306, 1985. doi: 10.1007/BF00649265. John Bartholdi III, Craig A Tovey, and Michael A Trick. Voting schemes for which it can be difficult to tell who won the election. 

Social Choice and Welfare , 6(2):157ŌĆō165, 1989. doi: 10.1007/BF00303169. Quentin Berthet, Mathieu Blondel, Olivier Teboul, Marco Cuturi, Jean-Philippe Vert, and Francis Bach. Learning with differentiable perturbed optimizers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9508ŌĆō9519, 2020. Mathieu Blondel, Olivier Teboul, Quentin Berthet, and Josip Djolonga. Fast differentiable sorting and ranking. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 950ŌĆō959. PMLR, 2020. Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs. i. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika ,39(3/4):324ŌĆō345, 1952. doi: 10.2307/2334029. Felix Brandt and Felix Fischer. On the structure of stable tournament solutions. Economic Theory , 36(3):399ŌĆō418, 2008. doi: 10.1007/s00199-007-0269-6. Felix Brandt, Felix Fischer, and Paul Harrenstein. Minimal stable sets in tournaments. Journal of Economic Theory , 146(4): 1481ŌĆō1499, 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.jet.2011.04.004. Felix Brandt, Vincent Conitzer, Ulle Endriss, J├®r├┤me Lang, and Ariel D Procaccia. Handbook of computational social choice .Cambridge University Press, 2016. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107446984. Felix Brandt, Johannes Hofbauer, and Martin Strobel. On the structure of stable tournament solutions. Economic Theory , 69(3): 621ŌĆō654, 2020. doi: 10.1007/s00199-019-01174-1. arXiv:2004.01651. Felix Brandt, Christian Geist, and Martin Strobel. Characterizing the top cycle via strategyproofness. Theoretical Economics , 18(3): 1011ŌĆō1044, 2023. doi: 10.3982/TE5120. Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li, Dacheng Li, Hao Zhang, Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference. 

International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. arXiv:2403.04132. Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 26, 2013. Shihan Deng, Wei Xu, Hao Sun, Wei Liu, Tao Tan, and Jianfeng Jiang. Mobile-bench: An evaluation benchmark for llm-based mobile agents. Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 8673ŌĆō8695, 2024. Cynthia Dwork, Ravi Kumar, Moni Naor, and D Sivakumar. Rank aggregation methods for the web. In Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web , pages 613ŌĆō622, 2001. doi: 10.1145/371920.372165. Arpad E Elo. The rating of chess players, past and present . Arco Pub., 1978. Mark Fey. Choosing from a large tournament. Social Choice and Welfare , 31(2):301ŌĆō309, 2008. doi: 10.1007/s00355-007-0279-3. Peter C Fishburn. Condorcet social choice functions. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics , 33(3):469ŌĆō489, 1977. doi: 10.1137/0133030. Irving John Good. A topological approach to the theory of voting. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology , 24(1): 42ŌĆō48, 1971. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8317.1971.tb00449.x. Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural networks. International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1321ŌĆō1330, 2017. Ralf Herbrich, Tom Minka, and Thore Graepel. TrueskillŌäó: A bayesian skill rating system. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 19, pages 569ŌĆō576. MIT Press, 2006. Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association ,58(301):13ŌĆō30, 1963. doi: 10.1080/01621459.1963.10500830. David R Hunter. Mm algorithms for generalized bradley-terry models. Annals of Statistics , 32(1):384ŌĆō406, 2004. doi: 10.1214/aos/ 1079120141. Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. Xiaoye Jiang, Lek-Heng Lim, Yuan Yao, and Yinyu Ye. Statistical ranking and combinatorial hodge theory. Mathematical Programming , 127(1):203ŌĆō244, 2011. doi: 10.1007/s10107-010-0419-x. John G Kemeny. Mathematics without numbers. Daedalus , 88(4):577ŌĆō591, 1959. 

49 STE 

Gilbert Laffond, Jean Lain├®, and Jean-Fran├¦ois Laslier. Composition-consistent tournament solutions and social choice functions. 

Social Choice and Welfare , 13(1):75ŌĆō93, 1996. doi: 10.1007/BF00179100. Marc Lanctot, Samuel Sokota, Karl Tuyls, Daniel Hennes, Edward Lockhart, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Paul Muller, Daniel Hennes, Karl Tuyls, and Michael Bowling. Soft condorcet optimization for ranking of general agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00119 ,2024. arXiv:2411.00119. Jean-Fran├¦ois Laslier. Tournament solutions and majority voting. Springer , 1997. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-60805-6. Taicheng Li, Hang Qian, Jinjie Zhang, Mengyi Xia, Shuai Gao, Xiaocheng Wang, and Wen Gao. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680 , 2024. arXiv:2402.01680. Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Jie Tang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. arXiv:2308.03688. R Duncan Luce. Individual choice behavior: a theoretical analysis . Wiley, 1959. Chris J Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous relaxation of discrete random variables. 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. Nicholas R Miller. A new solution set for tournaments and majority voting: Further graph-theoretical approaches to the theory of voting. American Journal of Political Science , pages 68ŌĆō96, 1980. doi: 10.2307/2110925. Mahdi Mohammadi, Yifan Li, Jasmine Lo, and Wilson Yip. Evaluation and benchmarking of llm agents: A survey. Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 7012ŌĆō7022, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3711896. 3736570. Herv├® Moulin. Choosing from a tournament. Social Choice and Welfare , 3(4):271ŌĆō291, 1986. doi: 10.1007/BF00292732. Sahand Negahban, Sewoong Oh, and Devavrat Shah. Rank centrality: Ranking from pairwise comparisons. Operations Research , 65 (1):266ŌĆō287, 2017. doi: 10.1287/opre.2016.1534. Joon Sung Park, Joseph C OŌĆÖBrien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , pages 1ŌĆō22, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3586183.3606763. Arun Rajkumar and Shivani Agarwal. A statistical convergence perspective of algorithms for rank aggregation from pairwise data. 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 118ŌĆō126, 2014. Noelia Rico, Camino R Vela, Pedro Alonso, and Irene D├Łaz. Reducing the time required to find the kemeny ranking by exploiting a necessary condition for being a winner. European Journal of Operational Research , 305(3):1323ŌĆō1336, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor. 2022.06.029. Thomas Schwartz. Cyclic tournaments and cooperative majority voting: A solution. Social Choice and Welfare , 7(1):19ŌĆō29, 1990. doi: 10.1007/BF00297579. Yongjae Yoo and Adolfo R Escobedo. A new binary programming formulation and social choice property for kemeny rank aggregation. Decision Analysis , 18(4):296ŌĆō320, 2021. doi: 10.1287/deca.2021.0433. H Peyton Young. An axiomatization of bordaŌĆÖs rule. Journal of Economic Theory , 9(1):43ŌĆō52, 1974. doi: 10.1016/0022-0531(74) 90073-8. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. arXiv:2306.05685. 

50