Title: VLN-NF: Feasibility-Aware Vision-and-Language Navigation with False-Premise Instructions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10533v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:06:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# VLN-NF: Feasibility-Aware Vision-and-Language Navigation with False-Premise Instructions 

Hung-Ting Su 1*†‡ Ting-Jun Wang 1‡ Jia-Fong Yeh 1 Min Sun 2 Winston H. Hsu 1

> 1

National Taiwan University 2National Tsing Hua University 

Abstract 

Conventional Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) benchmarks assume instructions are feasible and the referenced target exists, leav-ing agents ill-equipped to handle false-premise goals. We introduce VLN-NF , a bench-mark with false-premise instructions where the target is absent from the specified room and agents must navigate, gather evidence through in-room exploration, and explicitly output NOT-FOUND . VLN-NF is constructed via a scalable pipeline that rewrites VLN in-structions using an LLM and verifies target ab-sence with a VLM, producing plausible yet factually incorrect goals. We further propose 

REV-SPL to jointly evaluate room reaching, exploration coverage, and decision correctness. To address this challenge, we present ROAM ,a two-stage hybrid that combines supervised room-level navigation with LLM/VLM-driven in-room exploration guided by a free-space clearance prior. ROAM achieves the best REV-SPL among compared methods, while base-lines often under-explore and terminate prema-turely under unreliable instructions. VLN-NF project page can be found at https://vln-nf. github.io/ .

1 Introduction 

Language provides a flexible interface for specify-ing goals to situated agents in the physical world. Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) is a cru-cial robotic task studying language grounding and path planning under partial observability. Existing VLN datasets (Anderson et al., 2018b; Ku et al., 2020; Qi et al., 2020; Thomason et al., 2020) and supervised agents (Pashevich et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021, 2022) or agents based on LLM built on them (Zhou et al., 2024b,a; Chen et al., 2024; Lin 

> *This work was conducted at National Taiwan University. The author is currently affiliated with DRIC.
> †Project lead.
> ‡Equal technical contribution.

et al., 2025) typically assume that every instruction is feasible . In real deployments, however, humans often make mistakes when instructing robots. For example, a user may say “ pick up the plate on the table in the kitchen " when the plate is actually else-where (e.g., in the lounge or even in the car). A cognitive science study (Wang et al., 2002) found that humans mislocate an item roughly once in ev-ery seven object-location recall trials. Such instruc-tions are semantically well-formed but factually incorrect, and they can cause agents to hallucinate similar objects or search indefinitely. Therefore, an agent must be able to explore and explicitly report when the target cannot be found, rather than simply assuming success and exploiting task priors. Related efforts study instruction unreliability across embodied settings, including feasibility in 2D interfaces (Burns et al., 2022), stepwise VLN instruction errors (Taioli et al., 2024), obstruction-induced instruction–environment mismatch (Hong et al., 2024), and false-premise/abstention/hallucination in embodied QA or VLA (Wu et al., 2024, 2025; Hsieh et al., 2025; Chakraborty et al., 2025). Yet 

evidence-grounded NOT-FOUND for 3D partially observable VLN—where absence must be justified through autonomous exploration—is still largely unaddressed. To this end, we introduce VLN-Not Found (VLN-NF) , a new VLN task that evaluates agents’ ability to handle false-premise instructions referring to non-existent targets. We focus on this setting as a controlled but practical form of goal-level false premise, where absence must be established through exploration under partial observability rather than inferred from a single observation. In VLN-NF, the agent must predict 

NOT-FOUND when the target object is absent from the region specified by the instruction, indicating that the instruction is infeasible. To enable low-cost construction, we develop a scalable pipeline that converts feasible VLN instances          

> arXiv:2604.10533v1 [cs.RO] 12 Apr 2026 viewpoint (cup visible)
> viewpoint
> trajectory
> DUET + VLN-NF (Ours) DUET + VLN ROAM (Ours) + VLN-NF (Ours)
> cup: FOUND
> plate: ?
> cup: NOT FOUND
> plate: NOT FOUND cup: FOUND
> plate: NOT FOUND

Figure 1: A toy illustration of failure modes under unreliable instructions. For compactness, we visualize two 

separate single-target queries in the same scene (cup: feasible; plate: infeasible/absent in the kitchen). Left: Stan-dard VLN (DUET+VLN) lacks an explicit NOT-FOUND output (hence “?” for plate). Middle: Adding NOT-FOUND 

to action space (DUET+VLN-NF) can lead to premature abstention. Right: Our proposed ROAM+VLN-NF 

performs evidence-gathering exploration and outputs the correct decisions. 

into infeasible ones via instruction rewriting and automatic verification. An LLM replaces the original target with a plausible but absent alternative to simulate false-premise instructions, and a VLM verifies the target’s absence. This yields linguistically natural instructions with factually incorrect target descriptions. Human evaluation on a subset confirms high quality, with <2% errors. Unlike conventional VLN, where success is de-fined by reaching a single goal and efficiency is measured against a shortest path, VLN-NF re-quires evidence-gathering exploration under par-tial observability: the absence of a target cannot be confirmed from a single viewpoint. Naïvely reusing standard VLN metrics encourages degen-erate behaviors (e.g., stopping early or predicting 

NOT-FOUND without sufficient search). To enable principled comparison, we refine SPL and propose 

Reach–Explore–Verify SPL (REV-SPL) . REV-SPL (1) defines a reference exploration protocol that specifies where an agent should reasonably search given the instruction (e.g., local exploration when landmark cues exist and a broader room sweep otherwise), and uses the resulting reference length to normalize exploration efficiency; (2) eval-uates decision quality on mixed feasible/infeasible episodes, capturing the trade-off between abstain-ing when appropriate and avoiding false alarms; and (3) discourages premature termination by re-warding coverage of the target room and penalizing unsupported NOT-FOUND .Standard VLN benchmarks and agents typically assume feasibility and do not expose an explicit 

NOT-FOUND decision (Fig. 1, left). Naively adding a NOT-FOUND action and training via imitation learn-ing on reference exploration trajectories can in turn encourage premature abstention (Fig. 1, mid-dle). This arises because exploration is underdeter-mined—many trajectories can be reasonable and there is no explicit “search finished” signal—so imitation-learned VLN agents can suffer covariate shift (Kamath et al., 2023; Seo et al., 2024) and compounding errors (Zhang et al., 2024a), which often manifest as unreliable stopping behavior (Xi-ang et al., 2020). In VLN-NF, this can surface as premature NOT-FOUND predictions that are not sup-ported by sufficient evidence (Chakraborty et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025). Moreover, purely super-vised approaches typically require costly trajectory-level annotations (especially for exploration), while LLM-based agents often struggle with room-to-room navigation under partial observability with-out stepwise guidance. To tackle this challenge, we propose a two-stage hybrid framework, Room-

Object Aware Movement ( ROAM ; Fig. 1, right), which combines supervised room localization with LLM/VLM-driven in-room exploration and ver-ification. ROAM first localizes the target room using a weakly supervised model, then evidence-gathering explores the room and decides whether the target object is present or should be reported as 

NOT-FOUND .Experimental results show that existing VLN agents struggle on VLN-NF: a supervised baseline (Chen et al., 2022) achieves 4.2 REV-SPL, while LLM-based agents (Zhou et al., 2024b; Georgiev et al., 2024) reach only 1.0 and 1.5 REV-SPL. In contrast, ROAM attains 6.1 REV-SPL, improving over the supervised baseline by 45% while requir-ing only room-level annotations. 

Contributions. 1. Task, dataset, and construc-tion. We introduce VLN-Not Found (VLN-NF) , a VLN benchmark of false-premise instruc-tions requiring evidence-gathering exploration and 

NOT-FOUND , built via an LLM rewrite + VLM ab-sence verification pipeline with <2% human-judged errors. 2. Evaluation. We propose REV-SPL , a variant of SPL that uses a reference exploration protocol and decision-quality metrics to discourage premature stopping and unsupported NOT-FOUND .

3. Method. We present ROAM , a two-stage hy-brid that localizes the target room with supervi-sion and then performs VLM/LLM-driven in-room exploration and verification. 4. Results. ROAM achieves 6.1 REV-SPL, outperforming a supervised baseline by 45% while requiring only room-level annotations. 

2 Related Work 

Vision-and-Language Navigation. VLN studies how an embodied agent follows natural-language instructions to navigate in partially observed 3D en-vironments. Benchmarks such as R2R (Anderson et al., 2018b), RxR (Ku et al., 2020), REVERIE (Qi et al., 2020), and CVDN (Thomason et al., 2020) (built on Matterport3D (Chang et al., 2017)) have driven rapid progress, but they typically assume that the instruction is feasible and do not require agents to explicitly report failure. A related chal-lenge is reliable exploration and termination under partial observability: exploration is often under-determined and stopping decisions can be brittle, especially under imitation learning due to covariate shift and compounding errors (Kamath et al., 2023; Seo et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a; Xiang et al., 2020). VLN-NF targets this reliability axis by re-quiring evidence-grounded NOT-FOUND in addition to navigation. 

VLN agents and instruction augmentation. 

VLN approaches span memory-centric models (Pa-shevich et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021), map-based/topological methods (Chen et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Georgakis et al., 2022), and LLM-based planners or copilots (Zhou et al., 2024b,a; Pan et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2024; Long et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2025). Several works further improve navigation by rewriting or generating auxiliary guidance, e.g., disambiguating landmarks (Zhang et al., 2024b; Zhang and Kordjamshidi, 2023), jointly learning instruction following and generation (Wang et al., 2023a), or enabling controllable instruction gener-ation (Kong et al., 2024). These methods largely assume that a valid goal exists and use rewriting to make instructions easier to follow . In contrast, our pipeline rewrites feasible instances into false-premise (infeasible) ones and automatically verifies target absence, enabling systematic evaluation of 

NOT-FOUND decision-making. 

Instruction unreliability in VLN. Prior work has examined how corrupted or imperfect instruc-tions affect VLN agents. Hahn et al. (2023) perturb instruction tokens (e.g., directions, nouns, num-bers) to analyze sensitivity, highlighting the impor-tance of object nouns. Mind the Error (Taioli et al., 2024) modifies VLN-CE instructions (Krantz et al., 2020) and studies detection/correction of stepwise 

instruction errors, where the high-level goal re-mains valid but intermediate guidance is flawed. Our setting differs in that the instruction can be semantically well-formed yet factually incorrect at the goal level (false premise), so the correct be-havior is to gather evidence and output NOT-FOUND 

when appropriate. 

Infeasibility, mismatch, and abstention across embodied tasks. MoTIF (Burns et al., 2022) intro-duces unknown command feasibility with follow-up questions, but operates in a mobile-app setting where the agent has a fully observable 2D screen and receives a complete human exploration trace. R2R-UNO (Hong et al., 2024) creates instruction– environment mismatch via unexpected obstruc-tions, focusing on navigability changes rather than semantic goal absence. Beyond navigation, recent work studies false-premise handling in VLA manip-ulation (Hsieh et al., 2025) and abstention or hallu-cinations under instruction–visual inconsistencies in embodied QA and embodied agents (Wu et al., 2024, 2025; Chakraborty et al., 2025). VLN-NF complements these lines by instantiating goal false premises in 3D partially observable VLN, where absence must be justified through au-tonomous exploration and explicit NOT-FOUND .

3 The VLN-NF Dataset 

VLN-NF builds on the Matterport3D envi-ronment (Chang et al., 2017) and extends REVERIE (Qi et al., 2020) with infeasible goal descriptions. We adopt REVERIE as our base benchmark because it emphasizes goal-driven nav-igation and remote object grounding: instructions typically specify the target (and its surrounding con-text) rather than prescribing a step-by-step route as in R2R (Anderson et al., 2018b) and related Split #Scans #Pairs #Instr. #FOUND #NF Train 55 2,362 4,724 2,362 2,362 Val-seen 38 234 468 234 234 Val-unseen 10 718 1,436 718 718      

> Table 1: VLN-NF statistics. We use scan to de-note a Matterport3D building (scan ID). Each pair
> consists of one original REVERIE instruction ( FOUND ,feasible) and one generated VLN-NF instruction (NF,
> NOT-FOUND /infeasible), sharing the same scan, start viewpoint, and target room. Val-seen scans are a subset of the training scans.

datasets. Importantly, our construction pipeline is modular and can be transferred to other VLN datasets in future work. 

Dataset statistics and pairing. Table 1 sum-marizes VLN-NF. We inherit REVERIE’s en-vironment, viewpoint graph, and official train/-val_seen/val_unseen splits (Qi et al., 2020) (Matter-port3D scans (Chang et al., 2017)); we use scan to denote a building and room to denote a segmented region within a scan. Starting from REVERIE, we filter out instruction instances that are incompatible with VLN-NF, including: (i) instructions with-out a well-defined target room/object for reliable navigation and verification, (ii) cases where our rewriting+verification pipeline cannot confidently produce an absent-but-plausible replacement tar-get after resampling (e.g., the verifier repeatedly detects the substituted object), and (iii) episodes where the target-room connectivity/visibility is in-sufficient for our reference exploration protocol to achieve the minimum object-coverage requirement (used for filtering and evaluation). For each remain-ing REVERIE instruction instance, we construct a one-to-one VLN-NF counterpart by rewriting the target object to a plausible but absent object and verifying its absence, yielding paired FOUND 

(feasible)/NF ( NOT-FOUND , infeasible) instructions with identical navigation context (same scan, start viewpoint, and target room). The detailed statistics are shown in Table 1. 

3.1 Task Definition 

VLN-NF extends REVERIE-style VLN (Qi et al., 2020) with a NOT-FOUND option. An agent fol-lows an instruction X = ⟨w1, . . . , w L⟩ to navi-gate a Matterport3D scan represented as a graph 

G = ( V, E), where each node v ∈ V is a navigable viewpoint with a panoramic RGB observation (dis-cretized into n view images). At step t, the agent selects (i) a neighboring viewpoint to move to, (ii) 

Algorithm 1 Extract Reach Path                   

> 1: original_final_vp ←gt_path [−1]
> 2: room_vps ←VPS INSAME ROOM (original_final_vp )
> 3: reach_path ←[ ]
> 4: for each vp in gt_path do
> 5: reach_path.append (vp )
> 6: if vp ∈room_vps then
> 7: break
> 8: return reach_path

STOP and output a grounded target object as in REVERIE, or (iii) NOT-FOUND to abstain when the instruction is infeasible (i.e., the referenced target does not exist in the specified room). Thus, each episode requires both navigation to the target room and a final decision of FOUND vs. NOT-FOUND .

3.2 Dataset Construction 

Annotating exploration behavior is inherently chal-lenging: exploration trajectories are typically long (making dense annotation costly) and underdeter-mined—many distinct paths can be valid—unlike traditional VLN exploitation, where shortest paths provide a clear reference. To address this, we pro-pose a scalable pipeline to augment existing VLN datasets by (1) rewriting each instruction to create a linguistically natural but infeasible counterpart, (2) constructing an exploration protocol that can supervise imitation learning and serve as reference labels for evaluation. As shown in Fig. 2, we generate an infeasi-ble counterpart for each REVERIE instance via a rewrite-and-verify loop 1. Given instruction X

with target object o, the Rewriter 2 proposes a plau-sible replacement o′ that is not in the target-room object list A, and rewrites X into X ′ by substituting 

o → o′ while enforcing commonsense plausibility. The Verifier then runs open-vocabulary detection over all panoramas in the target room; if any view detects o′, we blacklist it and resample, otherwise we accept X ′ as an NF instruction. A manual au-dit on 5% of pairs yields < 2% errors 3, indicating that our rewriter-verifier pipeline reliably produces truly infeasible (NF) targets in the specified room. 

Generating Reference Exploration Paths. To decide FOUND vs. NOT-FOUND , an agent must ex-plore the target room; however, exploration tra-jectories are long and underdetermined, making dense human annotation costly. We therefore de-

> 1An example is provided in the Appendix.
> 2Prompts are provided in the Appendix.
> 3Details are provided in the Appendix. yes (present)

instruction: X with a target object o LLM Rewriter     

> Rewrite Xto X’ with o '
> ∉A

VLM Verifier   

> Check if o' in room views

NF proposal: X’ with a target object o’ 

Accept X’ as a new NF instruction 

known in-room objects: A

> no (absent)

room views     

> Update known in-room objects: A←A
> ∪{o'}

Figure 2: We design a scalable pipeline to rewrite VLN instructions and generate NF ( NOT-FOUND , infeasible) ones. An LLM-based rewriter uses commonsense priors to generate physically plausible instructions (e.g., water the plant underneath the window →clean the couch underneath the window ), while a VLM-based verifier checks that the referenced target entity is absent from the scene, ensuring NF correctness (Sec. 3). 

Algorithm 2 Reference Exploration Path (Local-ized / Landmark-Cued) 

1: o: original target object (from REVERIE annotations) 2: Vvis (o): viewpoints in the target room that can see o

3: vstart : endpoint of the reach path (room entry viewpoint) 4: cand_vps ← V vis (o)

5: explore_path ← BRUTE FORCE TSP (vstart , cand_vps )

6: return explore_path 

fine a reference exploration protocol (used for training/evaluation only; not exposed to the agent) with two cases. (1) Localized / landmark-cued search. When the instruction provides strong spa-tial cues (e.g., “beside the chair”), the plausible search region is localized. Since our NF instruc-tion is created by replacing the target object while keeping the surrounding description unchanged, we approximate this region by the viewpoints in the target room that can see the original target object o. The candidate set is small (typically 

N ≤ 15 ), so we compute a shortest visit order starting from the room entry viewpoint using an exhaustive TSP solver (Alg. 2). (2) Coverage / no-landmark search. Without such cues, we use a greedy explorer that repeatedly moves to the neigh-boring viewpoint that reveals the most new room objects , stopping when all room objects are ob-served or no unvisited neighbors remain (Alg. 3). If the final object coverage is below 85%, we dis-card the instance. Across retained subsets induced by stricter minimum reference-coverage thresh-olds (0.85/0.90/0.95), method ranking remains un-changed; we report the full sensitivity analysis in the appendix. 

3.3 Evaluation Metrics 

Exploration under partial observability is under-determined and long-horizon, so metrics must 

Algorithm 3 Reference Exploration Path (Cover-age / No-Landmark) 

1: vstart = endpoint of the reach path (room entry viewpoint) 2: Vroom = all viewpoints in the target room 3: O = set of all objects in the target room 4: Oseen = ∅

5: explore_path = [ vstart ]

6: visited = {vstart }

7: while True do 

8: vcurr = explore_path [−1] 

9: N = unvisited neighbors of vcurr 

10: if N = ∅ then 

11: break 

12: vnext = arg max  

> v∈N

|OBJECTS VISIBLE (v) \ O seen |

13: explore_path.append (vnext )

14: visited.add (vnext )

15: Oseen ← O seen ∪ OBJECTS VISIBLE (vnext )

16: if |O seen |/|O| ≥ 1.0 then 

17: break 

18: if |O seen |/|O| < 0.85 then 

19: discard the instruction-path pair 20: else 

21: return explore_path 

avoid rewarding premature “I’m done” decisions. In VLN-NF, an agent must (i) reach the target room and (ii) make a final decision of FOUND vs. 

NOT-FOUND . We report a primary composite metric (REV-SPL) together with a small set of decom-posed diagnostics for interpretability. 

Success Rates. Reach SR is the fraction of episodes where the agent visits at least one view-point inside the target room. Reach&Decision SR 

counts episodes where the agent both reaches the correct room and makes the correct final decision. 

Path-length Efficiency. Following SPL (Ander-son et al., 2018a), Reach SPL evaluates efficiency of reaching the target room using the reference reach path length lreach ,i :Reach SPL = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

Sreach ,i · lreach ,i 

max( preach ,i , l reach ,i ) .

(1) 

REV-SPL (Reach–Explore–Verify SPL). Our primary metric REV-SPL extends SPL to cap-ture (i) reaching the target room, (ii) correct 

FOUND /NOT-FOUND decision, and (iii) sufficient in-room exploration. Let Sri ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether the agent reaches the target room, and let Sdi ∈{0, 1} indicate whether it makes the correct final decision. We define object coverage Ci ∈ [0 , 1] 

as Ci =  

> S
> v∈PiOBJECTSVISIBLE (v)
> |Oi|

, where Pi is the agent’s in-room trajectory and Oi is the set of an-notated object instances in the target room. Let ℓi

and pi denote the reference and actual exploration lengths, respectively. We compute 

REV −SPL = 1

N

X

> i

Sri Sdi Ci

ℓi

max( pi, ℓ i)

· min 



1, pi

ℓi



.

(2) We additionally report Coverage and average path lengths as diagnostics. 

4 ROAM Framework 

VLN-NF evaluates evidence-grounded NOT-FOUND 

under partial observability: the agent must reach the referenced room, search for the target, and out-put FOUND or NOT-FOUND . This requires reliable room localization and coverage-aware in-room ex-ploration, declaring NOT-FOUND only after suffi-cient search yields no evidence of the target. Note that our goal here is not to formalize absence as a complete belief-theoretic inference problem, but to provide a tractable and reproducible operationaliza-tion that can be benchmarked under realistic VLN constraints. We observe that supervised VLN poli-cies such as DUET (Chen et al., 2022) are strong at inter-room navigation but often under-explore once inside the target room, since exploration is under-determined and lacks an explicit “search finished” signal. In contrast, LLM-based policies (Zhou et al., 2024b) can leverage commonsense priors to guide in-room search given context, but they of-ten struggle with floorplan-level navigation under partial observability. Motivated by these obser-vations, we propose Room-Object Aware Move-ment (ROAM, Fig. 3), a hybrid framework with a 

Room-Level Navigator (Sec. 4.1) for robust room localization and an In-room Explorer (Sec. 4.2) for evidence-gathering search. To compensate for LLMs’ weak geometric intuition, we further add a plug-and-play Free-space Raycasting Estimation Engine (FREE) that provides a free-space clear-ance signal (Sec. 4.3) to steer exploration toward larger unsearched regions with semantic context. 

4.1 Room-Level Navigator 

We model each environment as a navigation graph 

G = (V, E ), where each node v ∈ V is a panoramic viewpoint and each edge (u, v ) ∈ E

denotes a traversable transition. Let r(v) be the room label associated with viewpoint v, and let r⋆

be the target room parsed from the instruction. We define the target-room subgraph as R = {v ∈ V |

r(v) = r⋆}.Given an episode starting at vstart , we define an 

entry viewpoint 

vroom = arg min  

> v∈R

dG(vstart , v ), (3) where dG(·, ·) is the shortest-path distance on G.This reduces the original reach-and-explore task to a room-reaching problem: navigate from vstart 

to vroom . In our experiments, we obtain the room-entry target viewpoint from reach-to-room path prefixes (ending at room entry); more generally, since this stage only requires room identity, it can be trained from weak supervision that labels view-points with room IDs and synthesizes reach-to-room paths (e.g., shortest paths to any viewpoint in the target room), without trajectory-level in-room exploration annotation. We adopt DUET (Chen et al., 2022) as the backbone, though any VLN pol-icy capable of room-level navigation can be used. At inference, the navigator runs until the agent en-ters the target room (i.e., r(vt) = r⋆) or a step budget is reached, after which we hand off to the in-room exploration stage. 

4.2 In-room Explorer 

After entering the target room R, the In-room Ex-plorer 4 searches for the target object o′ and decides whether to output FOUND or NOT-FOUND . At time 

t, the agent is at viewpoint vt ∈ R with a history 

> 4Prompts are provided in the Appendix.

In-room Explorer Room-Level Navigator     

> 2.5m
> 1.7m
> 2.6m
> A studyroom corner with a table and chair.
> A living-area view with a fireplace and mantel
> Atable beside a bookshelf
> FOUND
> NOT FOUND

Instruction: Go to the study room and pick up the cup on the table visited candidate unvisited Figure 3: Overview of our two-stage framework, ROAM (Sec. 4). Left (Sec. 4.1): a room-level navigator trained with room labels only guides the agent to enter the target room. Right (Sec. 4.2): an LLM-based in-room explorer selects the next viewpoint using VLM captions as semantic context and a geometric coverage prior from FREE (Sec. 4.3) to favor headings that lead to larger unsearched regions. 

Ht (visited viewpoints and accumulated evidence), and has a set of reachable neighbors N (vt).We use a VLM stack to convert observations into semantic context (scene captions and detected objects), and an LLM to select actions in a closed loop. The action space is 

At = {move (v) | v ∈ N (vt)}∪{ FOUND , NOT-FOUND }.

(4) Let D(v, o ′) ∈ [0 , 1] denote the confidence from an open-vocabulary detector for object o′ at viewpoint 

v (Grounding-DINO (Liu et al., 2024) in our imple-mentation). In addition, for each candidate move 

v ∈ N (vt), we compute a free-space clearance cue 

dfree (vt → v) using FREE (Sec. 4.3). The explorer terminates with FOUND if 

D(vt, o ′) ≥ τ at any step; otherwise, it continues exploring and may output NOT-FOUND only when an evidence-backed stopping criterion is satisfied or a hard constraint is met (e.g., frontier exhaustion or a fixed exploration budget). We implement the explorer by augmenting NavGPT (Zhou et al., 2024b) with the FREE clearance cue, where NavGPT tokenizes observations via captioning and open-vocabulary detection and uses an LLM to reason over accumulated evidence and decide whether to continue or terminate. 

4.3 FREE 

When exploring, an agent benefits from both com-monsense priors (e.g., cups are likely on tables) and geometric coverage cues (e.g., moving toward a large unsearched area is often informative). Prior work suggests that LLMs encode commonsense view 1 2.5m view 3 2.6m      

> view 2 1.7m
> target: the cup on the table
> view 1: d_free: 2.5m A studyroom corner with a table and chair. view 2: d_free: 1.7m Atable beside a bookshelf view 3: d_free: 2.6m A living-area view with a fireplace and mantel

Figure 4: FREE (Sec. 4.3) segments navigable floor regions from the current view using an open-vocabulary visual model and uses depth-based raycasting to es-timate a free-space clearance dfree for each candidate direction. The resulting clearance cues are appended to the LLM prompt to encourage coverage-oriented explo-ration. 

knowledge but can be unreliable at geometric/s-patial reasoning (Comsa and Narayanan, 2023; Yan et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). To bridge this gap, we introduce a plug-and-play Free-space Raycasting Estimation Engine 

(FREE), which provides a free-space clearance 

signal to guide exploration. Given the current observation at vt, FREE es-timates, for each candidate heading θk, a clear-ance distance dfree (θk) indicating how far the agent can move before encountering an obstacle (Fig. 4). Concretely, we segment navigable re-gions (Grounded-SAM (Ren et al., 2024) in our experiments) and back-project the mask into 3D to perform raycasting. We then map each candidate move v ∈ N (vt) to its heading θ(v) and attach 

dfree (θ(v)) to the planner prompt as a geometric prior, encouraging actions that lead to larger un-searched regions. 5 Experiments 

5.1 Baseline Methods 

We adapt several representative VLN baselines to our dataset VLN-NF. DUET (Chen et al., 2022) is extended by adding an additional NOT-FOUND class in its decision head to support abstention on in-feasible episodes. NavGPT (Zhou et al., 2024b) is modified to include an explicit NOT-FOUND ac-tion in its action space/prompt, allowing the agent to terminate with NOT-FOUND when appropriate. 

MapGPT (Chen et al., 2024) is a map-guided GPT-based VLN agent that constructs an online linguistic topological map and performs adaptive multi-step path planning. SoM-Gemini-2.0-Flash 

follows the Set-of-Marks prompting strategy (Yang et al., 2023) and uses Gemini-2.0-Flash as the multi-modal backbone, providing a captioning-free alter-native to NavGPT’s captioning-then-LLM pipeline. Concretely, we overlay candidate viewpoints in Matterport3D with red markers and numeric labels, and query Gemini to select the next action (nav-igate, stop/ FOUND , or NOT-FOUND ). We include it as a planner/map-augmented baseline and adapt it to VLN-NF by evaluating it under the same 

FOUND /NOT-FOUND decision protocol and evalua-tion pipeline as the other methods. 

5.2 Results 

As shown in Table 2, ROAM achieves the best per-formance among all compared baselines on VLN-NF under our primary metric REV-SPL. 

Findings. (1) Room reaching vs. in-room veri-fication. DUET achieves strong room-reaching (Reach SR 53.8%, Reach SPL 37.0%) but at-tains only 69.5% coverage and 4.2 REV-SPL, in-dicating that reaching the target room does not guarantee evidence-gathering verification. (2) LLM/VLM baselines are unreliable under par-tial observability. NavGPT rarely reaches the tar-get room (Reach SR 8.2%) and yields 1.0 REV-SPL; while SoM explores more (Coverage 80.9%, Len(explore) 14.2), it still falls short on joint reach+decision (Reach&Decision SR 22.0%, REV-SPL 1.5), showing that commonsense alone is in-sufficient for robust long-horizon navigation and stopping. MapGPT improves over other LLM-based baselines (REV-SPL 3.2 vs. 1.0 for NavGPT and 1.5 for SoM), indicating that stronger global planning helps under false-premise instructions. However, it still remains below DUET (4.2) and both ROAM variants (6.1/5.6), suggesting that map-guided planning alone is insufficient for evidence-grounded FOUND /NOT-FOUND decisions under par-tial observability. (3) ROAM closes both gaps. 

By combining weakly supervised navigation with LLM/VLM-driven in-room search, ROAM sub-stantially improves both reaching and decision quality (Reach SR 58.6/62.6%, Reach&Decision SR 37.6/41.4%) and achieves the best REV-SPL (6.1/5.6), outperforming DUET by 45% while us-ing only room-level supervision. (4) REV-SPL captures the efficiency–thoroughness trade-off. 

ROAM-GPT-4o attains higher Reach&Decision SR than ROAM-GPT-3.5 (41.4% vs. 37.6%) but explores much longer (22.0 vs. 9.9), leading to slightly lower REV-SPL (5.6 vs. 6.1), consistent with REV-SPL penalizing inefficient wandering despite correct decisions. 

Ablation Study. Table 3 demonstrates the ef-fectiveness of our two-stage hybrid framework and the FREE design. Comparing (1) and (2), adding a room-level navigator trained with 

room labels only dramatically improves perfor-mance (e.g., Reach SR 7.8% →59.4% and REV-SPL 0.8% →5.6%), indicating that an LLM-only controller struggles with long-horizon room reach-ing under partial observability. Comparing (2) and (3), FREE further increases evidence cov-erage (79.2% →82.1% ) and improves REV-SPL (5.6% →6.1% ), validating that geometric clearance cues complement caption-based commonsense by steering exploration toward larger unsearched re-gions, while leaving reaching performance essen-tially unchanged. 

Transfer to standard feasible VLN. (Table 4) shows that ROAM also enhances VLN perfor-mance on REVERIE val_unseen . Removing the room-level navigator again leads to very poor navigation (Reach SR 8.1%, SPL 6.8%), while the two-stage design substantially improves both reaching and task success (Reach SR 62.0%, SPL 23.7%). Importantly, FREE remains beneficial 

even in the feasible-only setting, improving SR (42.0% →45.2%) and SPL (23.7% →25.1%), sug-gesting that FREE-style coverage cues help the LLM planner choose more informative viewpoints without hurting conventional VLN performance. 

False NOT-FOUND on feasible episodes. As shown in Table 5, on VLN-NF val_unseen, we further audit decision-level false NOT-FOUND pre-Setting Method Coverage Len (reach) Len (explore) Reach SR Reach&Decision SR Reach SPL REV-SPL supervised DUET 69.5% 13.1 7.8 53.8% 33.8% 37.0% 4.2% unsupervised NavGPT 59.1% 10.6 2.7 8.2% 5.4% 7.0% 1.0% unsupervised MapGPT 63.3% 13.3 3.5 30.0% 14.0% 18.2% 3.2% unsupervised SoM-Gemini-2.0-Flash 80.9% 10.0 14.2 39.4% 22.0% 28.9% 1.5% hybrid ROAM (Ours)-GPT-3.5 82.1% 11.2 9.9 58.6% 37.6% 44.1% 6.1%         

> hybrid ROAM (Ours)-GPT-4o 82.8 %12.8 22.0 62.6 %41.4 %45.4% 5.6%

Table 2: Comparison with baselines on VLN-NF val_unseen . We report our primary metric REV-SPL (Eq. 2), together with decomposed diagnostics, Reach SR , Reach&Decision SR , and Reach SPL . (Sec. 5.2)                             

> #2 Stage FREE Coverage Reach SR R&D SR Reach SPL REV-SPL (1) %%75.7% 7.8% 4.4% 6.7% 0.8% (2) !%79.2% 59.4% 37.2% 44.2% 5.6% (3) !!82.1 %58.6% 37.6% 44.1% 6.1%

Table 3: Ablation study of our ROAM framework using GPT-3.5 on the val_unseen split of VLN-NF.                         

> #2 Stage FREE Reach SR Reach SPL SR SPL (1) %%8.1% 6.6% 9.2% 6.8% (2) !%62.0% 48.1% 42.0% 23.7% (3) !!64.0% 48.4% 45.2% 25.1%

Table 4: ROAM (GPT-3.5) on REVERIE val_unseen. 

dictions made by ROAM (GPT-3.5) on FOUND 

episodes. Most such errors are classic room-reaching failures (55.7%), while the remainder are dominated by perception/grounding uncertainty (31.0%) and a smaller exploration-control compo-nent (13.3%), suggesting that enabling NOT-FOUND 

mainly amplifies calibration and verification chal-lenges rather than introducing a fundamentally new failure mode. 

6 Conclusion 

We study evidence-grounded NOT-FOUND for 3D VLN under unreliable (false-premise) instructions. We introduce VLN-NF, constructed by pairing feasible REVERIE episodes with automatically rewritten-and-verified infeasible counterparts, and propose REV-SPL to evaluate reaching, decision correctness, and evidence-gathering exploration ef-ficiency. We further present ROAM, a two-stage hybrid that combines room-level supervision for robust room localization with VLM/LLM-driven in-room exploration and verification, augmented by a free-space clearance cue (FREE). Across baselines, ROAM achieves the best performance on VLN-NF (6.1 REV-SPL), improving over a strong supervised agent by 45% while requiring only room-level an-notations. We view ROAM as a structured first step toward evidence-grounded abstention in 3D VLN under partial observability, while more principled absence reasoning and broader recovery behaviors 

Error source Share 

Room-reaching failure 55.7% Perception/grounding uncertainty 31.0% Exploration-control failure 13.3% 

Table 5: Error-source decomposition of decision-level false NOT-FOUND predictions made by ROAM (GPT-3.5) on feasible ( FOUND ) episodes in VLN-NF val_unseen. 

remain important future directions. 

Limitations 

Our study has several limitations that point to di-rections for future work. 

Data coverage and filtering. The experiments in this paper are based on REVERIE, which we adapt to the VLN-NF setting. To ensure reliable verifi-cation and stable reference-exploration generation, we apply strict filtering and currently retain 45% of REVERIE episodes. This trades raw coverage for higher confidence in NF correctness and evaluation stability. Importantly, this filtering is intended as a quality-control gate for evaluability rather than a mechanism to skew the benchmark distribution. As shown in Appendix, the filtering-only subset in-duces only very small language/object distribution shift relative to full REVERIE, while the additional shift in final VLN-NF is modest and expected from substituting absent-but-plausible targets. 

Evaluation of path quality . While we con-ducted human evaluation on a sampled subset of the VLN-NF dataset to confirm that the automatically labeled NOT-FOUND targets are accurate—achieving approximately 98% correctness—we did not per-form a formal assessment of the quality or natu-ralness of the generated paths themselves. This omission may leave potential gaps in evaluating whether the paths are contextually and semantically appropriate. 

Grounding-confidence threshold sensitivity in ROAM . The performance of the ROAM frame-work is sensitive to the object grounding model’s (e.g., Grounding-DINO) confidence threshold. Since the NOT-FOUND signal in our system is trig-gered based on whether any object surpasses the detection threshold, this fixed threshold may lead to performance degradation when applied to envi-ronments that differ significantly from the original training domain. 

Scope of false-premise types. VLN-NF cur-rently instantiates a focused form of goal-level false premise: the referenced target object is ab-sent from the room specified by the instruction. We choose this setting as a controlled but practical start-ing point, since mis-specified object locations are common in human instructions and, under partial observability, absence cannot be verified from a sin-gle viewpoint. Importantly, several broader false-premise variants reduce to the same core decision problem once conditioned on a described region; for example, a target located in the wrong room corresponds to “absent in the specified room,” and wrong attribute/object descriptions correspond to “absence of the described entity.” However, cases with multiple plausible referents or under-specified instructions may require clarification or interactive recovery rather than pure absence verification. Ex-tending VLN-NF to cover these broader variants and richer recovery behaviors is an important di-rection for future work. 

Future Work: Recovery Policy. Once the system identifies an instruction as leading to a 

NOT-FOUND target, it currently terminates naviga-tion. However, in real-world scenarios, users may expect recovery behaviors, such as rephrasing the instruction, exploring alternative paths, or asking for clarification. Designing and integrating such recovery strategies remains an open area for future research. 

Acknowledgment This work was supported in part by National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under Grant NSTC 113-2634-F-002-007. 

References 

Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta, Vladlen Koltun, Jana Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, and 1 others. 2018a. On evalua-tion of embodied navigation agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06757 .Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen Gould, and Anton Van Den Hengel. 2018b. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environ-ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3674– 3683. Andrea Burns, Deniz Arsan, Sanjna Agrawal, Ranjitha Kumar, Kate Saenko, and Bryan A. Plummer. 2022. A dataset for interactive vision-language navigation with unknown command feasibility. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2022 - 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part VIII , volume 13668 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 312–328. Springer. Trishna Chakraborty, Udita Ghosh, Xiaopan Zhang, Fahim Faisal Niloy, Yue Dong, Jiachen Li, Amit Roy-Chowdhury, and Chengyu Song. 2025. HEAL: An empirical study on hallucinations in embodied agents driven by large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 21226–21243, Suzhou, China. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Maciej Halber, Matthias Niessner, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. 2017. Matter-port3d: Learning from rgb-d data in indoor environ-ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06158 .Jiaqi Chen, Bingqian Lin, Ran Xu, Zhenhua Chai, Xiao-dan Liang, and Kwan-Yee K. Wong. 2024. Mapgpt: Map-guided prompting with adaptive path planning for vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Shizhe Chen, Pierre-Louis Guhur, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. 2021. History aware multimodal transformer for vision-and-language navigation. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems ,34:5834–5847. Shizhe Chen, Pierre-Louis Guhur, Makarand Tapaswi, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. 2022. Think global, act local: Dual-scale graph transformer for vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16537–16547. An-Chieh Cheng, Hongxu Yin, Yang Fu, Qiushan Guo, Ruihan Yang, Jan Kautz, Xiaolong Wang, and Sifei Liu. 2024. Spatialrgpt: Grounded spatial reasoning in vision-language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Iulia Comsa and Srini Narayanan. 2023. A benchmark for reasoning with spatial prepositions. In Proceed-ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 16328–16335, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Georgios Georgakis, Karl Schmeckpeper, Karan Wan-choo, Soham Dan, Eleni Miltsakaki, Dan Roth, and Kostas Daniilidis. 2022. Cross-modal map learning for vision and language navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 15460–15470. Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, Soroosh Mariooryad, and 1 others. 2024. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530 .Meera Hahn, Amit Raj, and James M. Rehg. 2023. Which way is ‘right’?: Uncovering limitations of vision-and-language navigation models. In Proceed-ings of the International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS) , pages 2415–2417, Richland, SC. Haodong Hong, Sen Wang, Zi Huang, Qi Wu, and Jiajun Liu. 2024. Navigating beyond instructions: Vision-and-language navigation in obstructed environments. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21452 . Accepted to ACM Multimedia (MM) 2024. Wen-Han Hsieh, Elvis Hsieh, Dantong Niu, Trevor Dar-rell, Roei Herzig, and David M. Chan. 2025. Do what? teaching vision-language-action models to re-ject the impossible. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 11861–11869, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Aishwarya Kamath, Peter Anderson, Su Wang, Jing Yu Koh, Alexander Ku, Austin Waters, Yinfei Yang, Ja-son Baldridge, and Zarana Parekh. 2023. A new path: Scaling vision-and-language navigation with synthetic instructions and imitation learning. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 10813– 10823. Xianghao Kong, Jinyu Chen, Wenguan Wang, Hang Su, Xiaolin Hu, Yi Yang, and Si Liu. 2024. Con-trollable navigation instruction generation with chain of thought prompting. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 37–54. Springer. Jacob Krantz, Erik Wijmans, Arjun Majundar, Dhruv Batra, and Stefan Lee. 2020. Beyond the nav-graph: Vision and language navigation in continuous envi-ronments. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) .Alexander Ku, Peter Anderson, Roma Patel, Eugene Ie, and Jason Baldridge. 2020. Room-across-room: Multilingual vision-and-language navigation with dense spatiotemporal grounding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07954 .Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu Zhong, Lijuan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, and 1 others. 2022. Grounded language-image pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition , pages 10965– 10975. Bingqian Lin, Yunshuang Nie, Ziming Wei, Jiaqi Chen, Shikui Ma, Jianhua Han, Hang Xu, Xiaojun Chang, and Xiaodan Liang. 2025. Navcot: Boosting llm-based vision-and-language navigation via learning disentangled reasoning. IEEE Transactions on Pat-tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence .Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, and 1 others. 2024. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 38–55. Springer. Yuxing Long, Xiaoqi Li, Wenzhe Cai, and Hao Dong. 2024. Discuss before moving: Visual language navi-gation via multi-expert discussions. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE. OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. Accessed: 2025-05-18. Bowen Pan, Rameswar Panda, SouYoung Jin, Rogerio Feris, Aude Oliva, Phillip Isola, and Yoon Kim. 2023. Langnav: Language as a perceptual representation for navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07889 .Alexander Pashevich, Cordelia Schmid, and Chen Sun. 2021. Episodic transformer for vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 15942– 15952. Yuankai Qi, Qi Wu, Peter Anderson, Xin Wang, William Yang Wang, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel. 2020. Reverie: Remote embodied visual referring expression in real indoor environ-ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 9982–9991. Yanyuan Qiao, Qianyi Liu, Jiajun Liu, Jing Liu, and Qi Wu. 2024. Llm as copilot for coarse-grained vision-and-language navigation. In European Confer-ence on Computer Vision , pages 459–476. Springer. Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kun-chang Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang, Yukang Chen, Feng Yan, and 1 others. 2024. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159 .Seokin Seo, Byung-Jun Lee, Jongmin Lee, HyeongJoo Hwang, Hongseok Yang, and Kee-Eung Kim. 2024. Mitigating covariate shift in behavioral cloning via robust stationary distribution correction. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 37. Francesco Taioli, Stefano Rosa, Alberto Castellini, Lorenzo Natale, Alessio Del Bue, Alessandro Farinelli, Marco Cristani, and Yiming Wang. 2024. Mind the error! detection and localization of in-struction errors in vision-and-language navigation. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on In-telligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 12993– 13000. Jesse Thomason, Michael Murray, Maya Cakmak, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. Vision-and-dialog navi-gation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 394–406. PMLR. Hongbin Wang, Todd R Johnson, Jiajie Zhang, and Yue Wang. 2002. A study of object-location memory. In 

Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , volume 24. Xiaohan Wang, Wenguan Wang, Jiayi Shao, and Yi Yang. 2023a. Lana: A language-capable navigator for instruction following and generation. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 19048–19058. Zihan Wang, Xiangyang Li, Jiahao Yang, Yeqi Liu, and Shuqiang Jiang. 2023b. Gridmm: Grid memory map for vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International conference on com-puter vision , pages 15625–15636. Tao Wu, Chuhao Zhou, Yen Heng Wong, Lin Gu, and Jianfei Yang. 2024. Noisyeqa: Benchmarking em-bodied question answering against noisy queries. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10726 .Tao Wu, Chuhao Zhou, Guangyu Zhao, Haozhi Cao, Yewen Pu, and Jianfei Yang. 2025. When robots should say “i don’t know”: Benchmarking absten-tion in embodied question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.04597 .Jiannan Xiang, Xin Wang, and William Yang Wang. 2020. Learning to stop: A simple yet effective ap-proach to urban vision-language navigation. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 699–707, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. He Yan, Xinyao Hu, Xiangpeng Wan, Chengyu Huang, Kai Zou, and Shiqi Xu. 2023. Inherent limitations of gpt=4 regarding spatial information. Preprint ,arXiv:2312.03042. Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Chun-yuan Li, and Jianfeng Gao. 2023. Set-of-mark prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding in gpt-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441 .Jihan Yang, Shusheng Yang, Anjali W. Gupta, Rilyn Han, Li Fei-Fei, and Saining Xie. 2024. Think-ing in space: How multimodal large language mod-els see, remember, and recall spaces. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.14171. Xiaoyu Zhang, Matthew Chang, Pranav Kumar, and Saurabh Gupta. 2024a. Diffusion meets DAgger: Supercharging eye-in-hand imitation learning. In 

Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) .Yue Zhang, Quan Guo, and Parisa Kordjamshidi. 2024b. Navhint: Vision and language navigation agent with a hint generator. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Yue Zhang and Parisa Kordjamshidi. 2023. Vln-trans: Translator for the vision and language navigation agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09230 .Gengze Zhou, Yicong Hong, Zun Wang, Xin Eric Wang, and Qi Wu. 2024a. Navgpt-2: Unleashing naviga-tional reasoning capability for large vision-language models. In European Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 260–278. Springer. Gengze Zhou, Yicong Hong, and Qi Wu. 2024b. Navgpt: Explicit reasoning in vision-and-language navigation with large language models. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 38, pages 7641–7649. 

A Appendix 

A.1 Implementation Details Dataset Generation Pipeline . We use Gemini 1.5 Flash (Georgiev et al., 2024) as the land-mark extractor to classify instructions into two categories: with landmark and without land-mark. This classification allows us to apply dif-ferent exploration strategies accordingly. We use 

gpt-3.5-turbo (OpenAI, 2023) as the Rewriter to revise REVERIE instructions by replacing the orig-inal target object with a new object that does not exist in the corresponding room. To ensure that the selected object is truly absent, we employ GLIP SWIN-Large (Li et al., 2022) as the Verifier, using a confidence threshold of 0.7. We provide below the prompt used for the rewriter(gpt-3.5-turbo): 

Listing 1: Prompt for the Rewriter                                                                           

> You should find anew target object to replace the old target_object and return me anew instruction . Notice : the new target object must doesn ’t look like any objects ( should be different type ) in avoid_objects list . Sometimes , you should review your answer and change the verb to which is suitable for the new target objects . Important : you can only replace the target object and the verb about it . Example : inputs : {’ instruction ’: ’Go to bedroom at the back left side of the house and turn on the lamp nearest the bedroom door ’, ’ target_object ’: ’lamp ’,

’ avoid_objects ’: [’ window ’, ’lamp ’, ’ picture ’, ’bed ’] , }outputs : {’ new_target_object ’: ’ the mirror ’, ’ new_instruction ’: ’Go to bedroom at the back left side of the house and take the mirror nearest the bedroom door ’, }explanation : First , Choose ’ the mirror ’ as the new target object because it isn ’t in the ’ avoid_objects ’ list , and ’take ’ is a good verb for ’ the mirror ’. So the new instructions is ’Go to bedroom at the back left side of the house and take the mirror nearest the bedroom door .’ Now it is your turn : inputs : ___inputs___ outputs : 

Below is an example from our dataset generated using our generation pipeline: 

Listing 2: Example for Our Dataset 

{’ original_instruction ’: ’Go to the laundryroom off of the garage and turn off the exhaust fan ’, ’ original_target_object ’: ’ exhaust fan ’, ’ avoid_objects ’: [’ cabinet ’, ’fan ’, ’ counter ’, ’ trash can ’, ’ floor ’, ’vent ’, ’ washing machine ’, ’excercise equipment ’, ’ faucet ’, ’ dryer ’, ’rug ’, ’sink ’, ’roof ’, ’ ceiling inset for fan ’, ’ plant ’] ’ new_target_object ’: ’ the stool ’, ’ new_instruction ’: ’Go to the laundryroom off of the garage and sit on the stool ’ }

ROAM Framework . In the Room-Object Ex-tractor, we use Gemini 1.5 Flash (Georgiev et al., 2024). We first fine-tune DUET(Chen et al., 2022) (the REVERIE version with object bounding box information) on VLN-NF using only the reach paths to obtain a Room Navigator. Notably, in-stead of using SPL to select the best model, we use Reach Success Rate (Reach SR) as the se-lection criterion. All other hyperparameters fol-low the default settings of DUET. During infer-ence, we assume that the Room Navigator has reached the target room. We then use GPT-4o 

or GPT-3.5-turbo (OpenAI, 2023) as the Room Explorer. This Room Explorer is adapted from NavGPT(Zhou et al., 2024b), with prompts mod-ified to suit the VLN-NF task. Additionally, we incorporate distance information estimated by our FREE module. For the grounding component, we use the grounding-dino-base (Liu et al., 2024) with a threshold of 0.75 to detect objects in each observation step taken by the Room Explorer. Below is the prompt used for GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4o in our experiments: 

Listing 3: Prompt for the In-Room Explorer 

As an intelligent embodied agent , you will navigate in an indoor environment to reach a target viewpoint based on a given instruction , performing the Vision and Language Navigation ( VLN ) task . The instruction will let you find all the target objects in a building . But if you cannot find the target object , don ’t stop , keep exploring the whole room to find other objects , but you still should have a good strategy , don ’t waste time and energy to move . You will move among static positions within a pre - defined graph , aiming for the nearest position to the object if the object is present . You will receive a trajectory instruction at the start and will have access to step history ( your Thought , Action , Action Input and Observation after the Begin ! sign ) and current viewpoint observation (including scene descriptions , objects , and navigable directions / distances within 3 meters ) during navigation . Orientations range from -180 to 180 degrees , with 0 being forward , right 90 rightward , right / left 180 backward , and left 90 leftward . And we will calculate how many meters extend in the direction of each viewpoint before hitting a wall . We hope this distance information can help you understand the spatial layout of the room . Please plan an effective exploration strategy based on this distance information . For example , if I have 2 viewpoints to choose (A: 1m , B: 5m) but I cannot find the target object so I better choose viewpoint B because I may have more exploration space to find the target . - Notice : You should have a good strategy to check whether the target object exists in the target room , and stop when you exploring all viewpoint in the target room . Explore the environment while avoiding revisiting viewpoints by comparing current and previously visited IDs If you think you are moving in circles , please stop and think whether any other objects may be hidden . If no , please output ’ Final Answer : Not found ’. Continue by considering your location and the next viewpoint based on the instruction , using the action_maker tool . And if you explored all the target room ( no other viewpoint to move to ) , stop and output ’ Final Answer : Not found ! ’. Show your reasoning in the Thought section . Follow the given format and use provided tools . { tool_descriptions } Do not fabricate nonexistent viewpoint IDs . ----Starting below , you should follow this format , do not use other format : Instruction : the instruction describing the whole trajectory Initial Observation : the initial observation of the environment Thought : you should always think about what to do next and why Action : the action to take , must be one of the tools [{ tool_names }] Action Input : " Viewpoint ID ", you should not choose object name or others , please only output " Viewpoint ID " Observation : the result of the action ... ( this Thought / Action / Action Input / Observation can repeat N times ) Thought : I found my target object , but Ishould check whether any other objects may be hidden . or Thought : I checked that no objects are hidden , I can stop . Final Answer : Not found ! ----Begin ! Instruction : { action_plan } Initial Observation : { init_observation } Thought : I should start navigation according to the instruction , {agent_scratchpad }""" 

ROAM Framework - Free-space Raycast-

Figure 5: Most occurred objects for NOT-FOUND instruc-tions. 

ing Estimation Engine (FREE) . We first uti-lize Grounded SAM (GroundingDINO_SwinT +

sam_vit_h_4b8939 version)(Ren et al., 2024) with the prompt "the floor, the ground, the carpet" to identify areas where the agent can move. We set the box_threshold and text_threshold pa-rameters to 0.25 and 0.3, respectively. Addi-tionally, our FREE module is designed to esti-mate the explorable distance within a single room. To avoid rays passing through doors and enter-ing other rooms—potentially affecting decision-making—we further use the prompt "the door frame" with box_threshold set to 0.3. During raycasting, any intersection with a detected door frame is treated as a termination point for the ray. (Show in Figure 6) After completing all segmentation, we perform Free-space Raycasting to estimate distances. First, we compute the vectors from the agent’s current viewpoint to each candidate viewpoint in the world coordinate system, then normalize these vectors to unit vectors with a length of 10 cm. Next, we extend these unit vectors in the world coordinate system towards the candidate view-points. The points along these rays are projected into the camera coordinate system of the observa-tion photos using the intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters from Matterport3D. If the ray encoun-ters an unwalkable area or a door frame bounding box, the extension stops. Since each step corresponds to 10 cm, we esti-mate the maximum distance the agent can move in that direction by counting the number of valid steps. This process enriches the information available to the LLM for better environment understanding. Figure 6: On the left, Grounding DINO detects the door frame. On the right, during raycasting, the process stops when encountering the door frame’s bounding box to avoid estimating incorrect distances (Note the red line indicating a distance of 2.8 meters). 

Human Evaluation. We randomly sampled 5% of the data. Annotators were shown: (1) the newly generated target object, and (2) all panoramas of the corresponding target room. They verified whether the new object truly did not exist in that room. 

A.2 Potential Risks 

We do not foresee direct risks related to malicious misuse, as our dataset VLN-NF does not include sensitive information, human identities, or unau-thorized photos of private residences. However, we acknowledge potential risks spe-cific to our work. Since our dataset VLN-NF and framework ROAM are designed to detect and respond to potentially incorrect instructions, im-proper handling of uncertainty may lead to prema-ture task termination or refusal to act when the in-struction is merely ambiguous rather than incorrect. Over-reliance on NOT-FOUND predictions could re-duce system reliability in real-world deployment. To mitigate these risks, we recommend incorporat-ing uncertainty estimation, confidence calibration and fallback interaction (e.g., asking for clarifica-tion). Fairness concerns such as overexposure to cer-tain environments or instruction styles are also worth noting. As our dataset is built on REVERIE and Matterport3D Simulator, it primarily reflects a limited range of indoor environments. Addition-ally, all instructions are currently in English, which may disadvantage models trained for multilingual or non-English scenarios. Overall, our work does not involve large-scale model training (e.g., LLM pretraining), does not pose privacy risks. We believe this benchmark promotes safer, more cautious navigation behavior by encouraging systems to recognize failure modes.                

> th ROAM MapGPT Retained R&D / REV R&D / REV episodes
> 85% 37.6 / 6.1 14.0 / 3.2 100.0% 90% 37.6 / 6.1 15.4 / 3.7 83.8% 95% 37.8 / 6.5 14.2 / 3.3 76.1%
> Table 6: Sensitivity to the minimum reference-coverage threshold. Each cell reports Reach&Decision SR / REV-SPL (both in %). This analysis varies only the retained evaluation subset (i.e., stricter evaluability fil-tering), while keeping agent trajectories unchanged. The retained-episodes column is reported relative to the 0.85 retained set.

A.3 License and Usage of REVERIE 

The REVERIE dataset used in this work is based on the Matterport3D environment and is distributed under a non-commercial research license. We follow all usage terms specified in the original REVERIE paper (Qi et al., 2020) and the Matter-port3D dataset (Chang et al., 2017). Our extensions (e.g., instruction augmentation and path generation) are built upon these publicly released annotations and simulation environments. We confirm that our use of REVERIE complies with the dataset’s license, and all modifications are intended for non-commercial academic research. The newly generated data will be released under similar terms to support future research in the com-munity. Furthermore, the datasets used do not contain any personally identifiable information or offen-sive content. We conducted manual sampling to verify this and ensure data quality. We have en-sured that our use and extension of these artifacts respect the original creators’ rights and adhere to ethical standards. 

A.4 Sensitivity to Minimum Reference-Coverage Threshold 

Our reference exploration protocol uses a minimum reference-coverage threshold to filter episodes whose target-room visibility graph is too sparse for stable evaluation. In the main paper, we retain episodes with minimum reference coverage ≥ 0.85 .To verify that our conclusions are not sensitive to this choice, we evaluate stricter retained subsets in-duced by thresholds 0.90 and 0.95 , while keeping agent trajectories unchanged. 

Interpretation. The results are stable across stricter retained subsets. ROAM (GPT-3.5) main-tains nearly identical Reach&Decision SR (37.6– 37.8%) and similar REV-SPL (6.1–6.5%) across thresholds, while MapGPT also shows only limited variation (R&D SR 14.0–15.4%, REV-SPL 3.2– 3.7%). Crucially, the method ranking is unchanged under all thresholds (ROAM > MAP GPT), indi-cating that our conclusions are not sensitive to the specific 0.85 choice and that the threshold does not create method-dependent advantages. Increas-ing the threshold simply filters out additional low-visibility cases, reducing the number of retained episodes, while leaving the qualitative conclusions unchanged. 

A.5 Use of AI Assistants 

We used AI assistants during the research and writ-ing process to improve writing clarity and presenta-tion. Specifically, ChatGPT was used for language polishing (e.g., grammar, rephrasing, and clarity ed-its), and for suggesting code improvements. It was also used to draft or edit non-empirical schematic figures (e.g., pipeline diagrams/icons) for illustra-tion purposes only. We also used ChatGPT and NotebookLLM to help organize and summarize lit-erature during the early stages of the related work review. No AI-generated images, captions, or other synthetic content were used as experimen-tal inputs or as evidence for the reported re-sults. All AI-assisted outputs were reviewed and edited by the authors, and all critical decisions regarding modeling, implementation, and anal-ysis were made by the authors. A.6 Filtering, Distribution Shift, and Scalability 

We further analyze whether the strict filtering used in VLN-NF substantially changes the underly-ing language/object distribution inherited from REVERIE. To separate the effect of filtering from the effect of NF construction itself, we compare: (i) REVERIE vs. retained REVERIE (filtering only), and (ii) REVERIE vs. final VLN-NF (post rewrite/verify). 

Interpretation. The filtering-only comparison shows extremely small distribution shift: word/ob-ject rank agreement remains very high and normal-ized object proportions remain nearly unchanged. This supports the view that strict filtering primarily enforces evaluability and label reliability, rather than introducing a substantial bias in language or object domain. The additional shift from final VLN-NF is modest and expected, since NF con-                          

> Metric Filtering only Final VLN-NF
> Words: Jaccard@50 ↑0.887 0.852 Words: Spearman ρ@50 ↑0.942 0.863 Words: JS ↓0.0106 0.0148 Objects: Spearman ρ↑0.985 0.859 Objects: Cosine sim. ↑0.998 0.958 Objects: JS ↓0.0017 0.0414 Objects: TV ↓0.0330 0.1627
> Table 7: Distribution-shift analysis for strict filtering and final NF construction. “Filtering only” compares full REVERIE against the retained REVERIE subset after QC filtering. “Final VLN-NF” compares full REVERIE against the final post rewrite/verify bench-mark. Higher is better for Jaccard, Spearman, and co-sine similarity; lower is better for JS and TV.

struction intentionally replaces the original target with an absent but plausible alternative. Impor-tantly, this shift does not collapse the benchmark into a degenerate object distribution; rather, it re-flects the intended transformation needed to create false-premise instructions. 

Scalability. Although strict QC reduces the current benchmark size, the rewrite-and-verify pipeline is naturally scalable. On the negative side, a single feasible episode can yield multiple NF variants by resampling alternative absent tar-gets with blacklisting, and the difficulty of gener-ated negatives can be controlled through prompt-ing or sampling priors (e.g., same-category vs. distant-category substitutes, or landmark-cued vs. no-landmark settings). On the positive side, feasi-ble instances can be expanded through lightweight heuristics such as instruction paraphrases or start-node variations that preserve target-room reacha-bility, and then paired with the same rewrite-and-verify pipeline to generate additional NF counter-parts. These properties make VLN-NF a high-confidence benchmark in its current form while leaving a clear path for future scaling. 

A.7 Model Size And Budget Baseline - DUET The number of parameters is nearly identical to that of DUET. Training on an RTX 4090 took approximately 48 hours 

Baseline - NavGPT Using GPT-4 to run infer-ence on the val_unseen split costs approximately less than $8 USD. 

Baseline - MapGPT Using GPT-4 to run infer-ence on the val_unseen split costs approximately approximately $ 215 USD. 

Baseline - SoM Using Gemini-2.0 Flash to run inference on the val_unseen split costs approxi-mately $ 180 USD. 

Baseline - ROAM We trained DUET as a Room Navigator. Training on an RTX 4090 took approx-imately 48 hours. During the Fine-grained stage, we used GPT-3.5 for inference on the val_unseen split, which incurred a cost of approximately less than $3 USD.