Title: Anumati: Proof of Adherence as a Formal Consent Model for Autonomous Agent Protocols

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.16524v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:16:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Anumati: Proof of Adherence as a Formal Consent Model for Autonomous Agent Protocols 

Ravi Kiran Kadaboina 

Independent Researcher M.S., Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, 2011 Anumati is Sanskrit for “consent” or “formal permission.” 

# Abstract 

As autonomous AI agents increasingly call other agents to complete tasks on behalf of a human principal, a structural accountability gap has emerged: the calling agent accepts the terms of service of the callee without any protocol-level mechanism to prove that it understood those terms or that it subsequently honoured them. Authentication protocols such as OAuth and mutual TLS establish who may call which capability. They do not address under what conditions a permitted call may be made, and those conditions change as the callee’s policies evolve. In this paper we formalise the distinction between proof of acceptance (a timestamped acknowledgement) and proof of adherence (a per-action reasoning record citing the specific clause evaluated). We propose three primitives (PolicyDocument, ConsentRecord, and AdherenceEvent) that together constitute a versioned, append-only consent model for agent-to-agent communication. The model is instantiated as a non-breaking extension to two widely used agent protocols: the Agent2Agent (A2A) protocol and the Model Context Protocol (MCP). A TLA+ specification of the consent lifecycle, together with a reference Python implementation of the chain integrity and adherence trail validators, is available in the accompanying repository. 

# 1. Introduction 

In this section we discuss the motivation leading to our work, an overview of the current state of consent handling in agent protocols, and our approach to closing the accountability gap that we identify. Section 1.1 gives background on how calling agents today commit their principals to the terms of the services they call. Section 1.2 describes the motivation upon which the work was developed, including the empirical evidence that agents are not honouring even basic exclusion signals today, and the regulatory pressure under the EU AI Act. Section 1.3 describes related work in single-agent governance, runtime enforcement, and privacy standards. Section 1.4 describes the specific contributions of this work and our approach. 1

> arXiv:2604.16524v1 [cs.CR] 16 Apr 2026

1.1 Background 

The Agent2Agent protocol (A2A) [4] standardises how one agent advertises its capabilities and authenticates another. The Model Context Protocol (MCP) [5] plays an analogous role for communication between an orchestrator agent and the tools or data sources it consumes. Both protocols delegate security to standard HTTP authentication mechanisms such as OAuth 2.x, API keys, OpenID Connect, and mutual TLS. These mechanisms are well designed for the question they answer: given a request, is the requesting agent permitted to invoke the requested capability. A second category of rules governs something different. Consider an agent that provides a data analysis service. Authentication tells the calling agent whether it is permitted to invoke the analyse_dataset skill. It says nothing about whether the calling agent may store the task output beyond the current session, whether it may aggregate results across multiple principals, whether it is obligated to notify its human principal before invoking skills above a given cost threshold, or whether it may share results with a third agent the callee has not authorised. These constraints are contextual, compositional, and they change as the callee’s policies evolve. They cannot be encoded in OAuth scopes, which are discrete, static, and binary. Scopes answer “permitted or not.” Usage policy answers “permitted, under these conditions, as of this version, subject to change.” Further complicating the picture, under the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act (UETA) §14, contracts formed by electronic agents bind the human principal, even without their awareness [7, 8]. As callee policies evolve and calling agents continue operating under stale terms, the principal’s legal exposure compounds silently. 

1.2 Motivation 

The gap is not theoretical. The 2025 AI Agent Index surveyed 30 deployed agents and found that only 6 of them explicitly stated that their crawler bots respect robots.txt, while 16 provided no clear statement about web exclusion compliance at all [1]. Robots.txt is a proxy: if agents ignore the most basic signal of “do not access this,” there is no reason to expect that they will honour more nuanced usage terms. The problem is empirical and is worsening as agent deployment scales. The EU AI Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689) compounds the urgency. The Act enforces in phases. Prohibited AI practices took effect in February 2025 and general-purpose AI model obligations from August 2025. The obligations most relevant to autonomous agent transactions, namely Art. 14 (human oversight of high-risk AI systems) and Art. 50 (transparency obligations including disclosure of AI-generated content and automated decision-making), take effect on August 2, 2026 for high-risk systems listed in Annex I and Annex III [2]. As of this writing, the EU AI Office has published no technical guidance addressing consent mechanisms for autonomous agent-to-agent transactions [3]. For systems in 2scope, effective oversight requires, at minimum, that the principal can determine what policies the agent agreed to, what clauses it evaluated at each action, and what reasoning it applied. The present model is designed to provide exactly that audit surface in advance of such guidance, so that implementations are not built retroactively under deadline pressure. Several years ago I implemented a versioned terms-of-service system at a con-sumer technology company that tried to take this problem seriously. Policy documents were managed in a headless content management system (CMS) with full version history, each published version immutable and content-addressed. The authentication state machine, built on a custom OAuth 2-based flow, checked on every session whether the user’s most recently accepted document version matched the current published version. If not, the session was blocked and the user was presented with the new terms before proceeding. Every acceptance event was stored with a pointer to the exact document version and a reference to the prior acceptance record, forming a singly-linked chain per user. The goal was legal defensibility: in any dispute, the system could show precisely which version of the terms a user had accepted, and when, across the full history of their account. The data was unsurprising. Median time on the acceptance screen was under four seconds. The linked chain proved acceptance with precision; it proved nothing about comprehension or subsequent compliance. That experience motivates the model we propose here. Autonomous agents, unlike humans, are capable of parsing a policy clause by clause, evaluating each at every action, and leaving a reasoning trail that a regulator or principal can inspect after the fact. The consent infrastructure available to them today does not ask them to do any of this. 

1.3 Related Work 

A family of recent proposals addresses agent governance from adjacent directions. The Open Agent Governance Specification (OAGS) [12] defines five governance primitives but is explicitly “local-first”; it governs what a single agent may do in its own environment rather than what two agents agree to when they interact. OpenMandate [15] takes a similar single-agent stance using declarative YAML mandates. Policy Cards [16] make an agent’s constraints inspectable through machine-readable artefacts, and the PolicyDocument we introduce is the callee-side equivalent of a Policy Card. At the runtime-enforcement layer, PCAS [17] compiles Datalog-derived policies into instrumented agents that are compliant by construction. MI9 [19] detects drift in agent behaviour after the fact. Both address a different layer than the bilateral consent model we propose; a deployment could use PCAS for local enforcement and the present model for cross-agent consent in parallel. Governance-as-a-Service (GaaS) [18] proposes an external governance agent supervising other agents at runtime. The AIGA Internet-Draft [14] proposes 3tiered risk-based governance covering action authorisation and audit logging. Both govern what an agent does; the model we propose governs under what agreed terms .For financial services, the FINOS AI Governance Framework v2.0 [13] defines MI-21 (Agent Decision Audit and Explainability) with tiered audit logging up to cryptographic tamper-evidence. MI-21 is conceptually close to the adherence trail we describe in §3.3 but is explicitly silent on consent versioning. On the privacy and consent standards side, IEEE P7012 [20] defines machine-readable personal privacy terms, and W3C DPV v2.2 [21] provides standardised vocabularies for data processing activities. The Kantara Consent Receipt [22] established early principles (consent as receipt, machine-readability, user porta-bility) that inform the ConsentRecord design in §3.2. 

1.4 Our Approach 

We approach the problem by introducing three primitives that together form a versioned, append-only consent model between any two agents. PolicyDocument 

is the callee’s machine-readable usage policy, content-addressed and semver-versioned. ConsentRecord is the calling agent’s parsed understanding of that policy, with an entry for every clause. AdherenceEvent is a per-action record that cites the specific clause evaluated, the decision reached, and the natural-language reasoning the agent applied. The three primitives together produce two linked lists (a consent chain and an adherence trail) which together satisfy five properties (completeness, traceability, tamper evidence, version fidelity, and optional ledger anchoring) relevant to legal and regulatory accountability. We instantiate the model as a non-breaking extension to A2A [4] and MCP [5] using each protocol’s existing extension mechanism. We emphasise that the instantiations require no changes to the A2A or MCP core specifications; both protocols already provide native extension mechanisms that our protocol, the Agent Consent and Adherence Protocol (ACAP), uses without modification, and enforcement is carried out by middleware at the caller and callee boundaries rather than by the core runtime. We specify the consent lifecycle as a TLA+ state machine and verify seven safety properties and two liveness properties under the TLC model checker. A reference Python implementation of the canonical hashing, chain validator, and adherence trail validator is provided in the accompanying repository, together with 35 unit tests that exercise the structural invariants described in §3. Section 2 discusses why authentication alone is insufficient for usage policy governance between agents. Section 3 introduces the three primitives and the formal verification of the consent lifecycle. Section 4 shows how the model integrates into A2A and MCP without modification of their core specifications. Section 5 surveys related work in more detail. Section 6 discusses the known limitations of the model, including the self-attestation boundary and agent ephemerality. Section 7 concludes. 4The TLA+ specification, TLC configuration, protobuf schema, and reference Python implementation are available at: https://github.com/ravikiran438/agent-consent-protocol 

# 2. The Consent Gap in Agent Protocols 

2.1 What Authentication Covers (and What It Does Not) 

A2A supports OAuth 2.x, API keys, OpenID Connect, and mutual TLS [4]. MCP uses OAuth 2.1 with incremental scope negotiation following its November 2025 specification update [6]. Both are well designed for their stated purpose: establishing who may invoke which capability. Usage policy governs something different. As described in §1.1, a callee agent providing a data analysis service cannot express, through OAuth scopes alone, whether the calling agent may store task output beyond the current session, aggregate results across multiple principals, notify its human principal before expensive skill invocations, or share results with a third agent. These constraints are contextual, compositional, and evolve as the callee’s policies change. They cannot be encoded in OAuth scopes, which are discrete, static, and binary. 

2.2 The Version Problem 

Human-facing terms of service change. Services update their policies, publish new versions, and expect users to re-accept. In practice this is handled by a login gate: the user sees a banner, clicks agree, and the session proceeds. The mechanism is crude but functional. For agents, no equivalent mechanism exists in current protocols. Neither A2A nor MCP defines a versioned usage policy object, a typed consent record, or a mechanism to block skill invocation until a new policy has been processed [4, 5]. When a callee updates its terms, calling agents have no protocol-level notification and no structured way to record re-acceptance. Thus the liability accumulates silently, and the human principal identified through UETA §14 ends up bound to terms the agent has never in fact evaluated. 

2.3 Proof of Acceptance vs. Proof of Adherence 

We distinguish two consent properties. 

Proof of acceptance is the traditional model: a timestamped record binding an identity to a document version at a point in time. It proves a party agreed .It proves nothing about whether the party understood the terms or subsequently complied with them. 

Proof of adherence is what agents can uniquely provide: a per-action record citing the specific policy clause evaluated, the agent’s reasoning, and the en-5forcement decision. It proves the agent evaluated the relevant clause before acting .Table 1 summarises the distinction.                 

> Dimension Proof of Acceptance Proof of Adherence Granularity Whole document Per-clause, per-action Timing At acceptance event At every action attempt Content Timestamp + identity Clause citation + reasoning Understanding Assumed Verified (parsed claims) Post-acceptance compliance Unverifiable Auditable Legal value Proves agreement Proves agreement and compliance

Agents are capable of proof of adherence because they can reason about policy text. The consent infrastructure in current agent protocols simply does not ask them to. Closing that gap is the work of this paper. 

# 3. A Formal Consent Model 

We define three primitives. Together they constitute a versioned, append-only consent model for agent-to-agent communication. We refer to the resulting protocol as the Agent Consent and Adherence Protocol (ACAP) .

3.1 PolicyDocument 

A PolicyDocument is the machine-readable equivalent of a terms-of-service document. It is versioned using semantic versioning, content-addressed via SHA-256, and published by the callee agent at a well-known HTTPS URL. Formally, a PolicyDocument P is a tuple: 

P = (version, hash, effective_date, supersedes, claims, publisher, natural_language_uri) 

where version is a semver string, hash is the SHA-256 digest of the canonical JSON serialisation of P with the hash field set to the empty string (which breaks the circularity such that the digest input never includes itself), effective_date 

is an ISO 8601 timestamp, supersedes is the version of the document P replaces (if any), claims is a sequence of PolicyClaim objects (order preserving; claim order is significant for display and diff computation), publisher is the callee agent’s identifier (DID or HTTPS URL), and natural_language_uri is the URL of the human-readable document from which the claims are derived. A PolicyClaim c is a tuple: 

c = (id, clause_ref, action, asset, rule_type, constraint, since_version, 

6category, dimension) 

where rule_type is one of {permission, prohibition, obligation}, action and 

asset use ODRL 2.2 vocabulary where applicable [9], and constraint is an optional ODRL constraint expression. The since_version field records which policy version introduced this claim, enabling calling agents to compute diffs between versions. The category and dimension fields classify the claim by kind of data and kind of operation; these are consumed by extensions (see §6.3) and may be left unspecified in the core. The key design constraint is that every PolicyClaim must have a stable id 

across versions. A claim that changes meaning between versions MUST be assigned a new id ; the old id is retired. This allows calling agents to detect precisely which claims changed when a version bumps. 

3.2 ConsentRecord 

A ConsentRecord documents the calling agent’s parsed understanding of and decision about a specific PolicyDocument version. Records form a singly-linked list (the consent chain ) for a given caller-callee pair. Formally, a ConsentRecord R is a tuple: 

R = (id, prev_id, caller, callee, policy_version, policy_hash, parsed_claims, decision, timestamp, valid_until, signature, caller_capability_hash, reconsent_trigger) 

where prev_id references the immediately preceding record in the chain (null for the first record), parsed_claims contains one ParsedClaim entry for ev-ery PolicyClaim in the referenced PolicyDocument , decision is one of {ac-cepted, rejected, conditional}, and valid_until is either an ISO 8601 times-tamp or a sentinel value ( "on_version_bump" , "on_capability_change" , or 

"on_any_change" ; see §3.6). A ParsedClaim entry records, for each policy claim, whether the calling agent understood the claim, whether it disputes the claim, and if disputed, a natural-language explanation of the dispute. 

Critical invariant : every PolicyClaim in the PolicyDocument MUST have a corresponding ParsedClaim in the ConsentRecord . Agents cannot silently ignore inconvenient clauses. This single requirement is what separates the model from a boolean acceptance flag. Conditional consent is supported such that when decision is conditional , the calling agent has accepted some claims but disputes others. The callee MUST enforce claim-level gating: a skill whose governing PolicyClaim is marked 

disputed: true in the ParsedClaim array is blocked, while skills governed by undisputed claims remain invocable. This allows the agent to continue operating at reduced capability rather than halting entirely, which is a practical necessity 7for long-running agent workflows where a blanket rejection would cascade into downstream failures. The callee enforces claim-level gating by cross-referencing the ParsedClaim array in the caller’s ConsentRecord against its own skill registry. Each skill in the callee’s A2A AgentCard (or MCP tool manifest) is annotated with the claim_id 

values that govern it via the policy_claims array (see §4.1). When the callee receives a task request, it resolves the caller’s active ConsentRecord , iterates the requested skill’s policy_claims , and checks whether any referenced claim is marked disputed: true or understood: false . If so, the callee MUST reject the invocation with a structured error indicating which claims block the skill. The linked-list structure of the consent chain is central to the legal value of the model. A chain of records shows the full history of what a calling agent agreed to on behalf of its principal, at the time of each action, rather than just at signup. We used the same linked structure in a prior production human-authentication system to preserve all accepted versions of terms per user for legal auditability. Here it is applied to the agent-to-agent context and extended to include the per-action adherence records described in §3.3. 

3.3 AdherenceEvent 

An AdherenceEvent records the calling agent’s runtime evaluation of a policy claim for a specific action attempt. Events form a second singly-linked list (the 

adherence trail ) anchored to a ConsentRecord .Formally, an AdherenceEvent E is a tuple: 

E = (id, prev_id, consent_record_id, action, claim_id, clause_ref, decision, reasoning, timestamp, context, signature) 

where decision is one of {permit, deny, escalate} and reasoning is a natural-language string explaining why the agent reached that decision. The reasoning field is the mechanism that makes adherence auditable. An agent that records: 

“Action ‘aggregate_sessions’ maps to odrl:aggregate on pii:session_data. Policy v2.1.0 §3.4 prohibits this where purpose = behavioural_profiling. Denying.” 

has produced something qualitatively different from a system that simply refuses a request. The reasoning is citable, inspectable, and attributable. Auditors can trace any enforcement decision back to the exact clause that governed it. 

3.4 Chain Properties 

The two linked lists (the consent chain and the adherence trail) together satisfy five properties that are relevant to legal and regulatory accountability. 81. Completeness. Every action attempt produces an adherence event. A deny without an event is indistinguishable from a silent failure. 2. Traceability. Every adherence event references a consent record, which in turn references a policy document version. The full chain from action to clause is traversable. 3. Tamper evidence. Records and events carry optional JWS signa-tures [10] over their canonical JSON with the signature field set to the empty string prior to signing, using the same bootstrapping convention as PolicyDocument.hash in §3.1. The resulting signature is then inserted into the record. A verifier can confirm that no record was modified after signing. 4. Version fidelity. The policy_hash field in the consent record binds the acceptance to the exact document content, independent of URI availability. The hash survives link rot. 5. Ledger anchoring (optional). JWS signatures prove who signed but not 

when , and they cannot prevent collusion. If both parties agree to rewrite the chain, signatures alone cannot detect it. For deployments requiring third-party tamper evidence, each record may carry a ChainAnchor : a cryptographic hash anchored to an external append-only ledger. The model is ledger-agnostic; the anchor may point to a public blockchain (Ethereum, Polygon), a permissioned ledger (Hyperledger Fabric), or a transparency log (RFC 9162). Anchoring is strictly additive and deployments that do not require it simply omit the chain_anchor field. 

3.5 Formal Verification of the Consent Lifecycle 

We specify the consent lifecycle as a TLA+ state machine and verify its safety and liveness properties under model checking. The specification is included in the reference repository ( specification/ConsentLifecycle.tla ) with the corresponding TLC configuration ( specification/ConsentLifecycle.cfg ). The lifecycle has seven states for a given caller–callee pair: Idle, PolicyFetched, GovernanceReview, Accepted, Rejected, Conditional, and Stale, shown in Figure 1. Table 2 lists the safety and liveness properties verified by TLC. 9Figure 1: ACAP consent lifecycle state machine. The seven states govern the bind/re-bind cycle between a single caller and callee pair. GovernanceReview is reachable only when the governance-tiering extension is loaded (see §6.3); with the core alone, re-consents flow directly from PolicyFetched to the decision states. 

Table 2. Safety and liveness properties verified by TLC. 

ID Property Kind Statement S1 NoSkillWithoutConsent Safety A skill call never occurs unless at least one ConsentRecord in the chain has decision ∈

{accepted, conditional}. S2 ChainMonotonicity Safety consentChain and 

adherenceTrail are append-only; lengths never decrease. S3 AdherenceAnchored Safety Every AdherenceEvent references a valid ConsentRecord index. S4 SkillRequiresPermit Safety A skill call is always preceded by at least one AdherenceEvent with decision = permit on an undisputed claim. S5 ConditionalGating Safety A disputed claim always produces deny or escalate, never permit. S6 NoDisputedPermit Safety No adherence event for a disputed claim carries a permit decision. 

10 ID Property Kind Statement S7 NoSkillOnCapabilityDrift Safety No skill call occurs when the caller’s capability fingerprint has changed since the ConsentRecord was created. L1 EventualReConsent Liveness Under weak fairness, any staleness (version bump or capability change) eventually leads to a new ConsentRecord. L2 EventualCapReConsent Liveness A capability bump eventually leads to re-consent. The agent does not operate indefinitely under stale reasoning. 

Properties S1–S4 establish the core consent-before-action guarantee. S5–S6 formalise conditional gating for reduced-permission operation. S7 addresses agent ephemerality such that capability drift blocks all skill invocation until re-consent is obtained. We note that caller_capability_hash is self-reported by the caller and the callee cannot independently verify it; this is a known limitation which we discuss in §6.1. L1 and L2 ensure the protocol does not deadlock after either a policy version bump or a capability change. The model was checked with TLC using MaxVersions = 3 , MaxAdherenceEvents = 4 , and MaxCapVersions = 2 , covering three policy version bumps, two capability changes, and four adherence events per consent epoch. All nine properties hold with zero violations across the reachable state space. TLC performs bounded model checking such that it exhausts the state space within the declared constant bounds but does not constitute a proof for arbitrary parameter values. The bounds were chosen to cover realistic deployment scenarios; unbounded verification would require inductive proof techniques beyond the scope of the present work. 

3.6 Capability-Bound Consent 

Human users persist. They create accounts, accumulate consent history, and the consent chain tracks a stable identity across years. Agents are different in kind such that they are spawned, updated, and terminated. An agent instance may exist for minutes or hours, and the next instance, even if it shares the same 

caller_agent_id , may run a different model, carry different tools, or operate under a different context window. This creates a problem that human consent systems never face: the reasoning entity that consented may not be the reasoning entity that acts. An agent running GPT-4o that recorded understood: true for a prohibition on data 11 aggregation may be replaced by an instance running a fine-tuned variant that interprets “aggregation” differently. The ParsedClaim entries in the original 

ConsentRecord are no longer trustworthy, not because they were falsified, but because the entity that produced them no longer exists. The model addresses this with caller_capability_hash , a SHA-256 fingerprint of the agent’s model identifier, tool manifest, and reasoning configuration (system prompt, temperature, and any chain-of-thought or retrieval-augmented gener-ation settings that influence how the agent interprets policy claims), recorded on every ConsentRecord . The hash is computed over the canonical JSON seri-alisation (RFC 8785) of a CapabilityManifest object containing these fields in alphabetical key order, using the same circularity-breaking convention as 

PolicyDocument.hash in §3.1, such that the caller_capability_hash field is set to the empty string before hashing. Three re-consent triggers are defined:      

> Trigger Cause Effect
> POLICY_BUMP Callee publishes new PolicyDocument Re-fetch, diff, re-consent
> CAPABILITY_CHANGE Caller’s capability hash changes Re-evaluate all ParsedClaims
> PRINCIPAL_CHANGE Human principal identity changes Full re-consent with new principal_id

The valid_until field supports sentinel values that control invalidation granular-ity: "on_version_bump" for callee-side changes only, "on_capability_change" 

for caller-side changes only, or "on_any_change" for either side. This lets callees choose their risk tolerance such that a financial-services agent may require "on_any_change" while a low-stakes utility agent may accept 

"on_version_bump" .The consent chain is stored by the callee. It is the callee’s audit trail and the callee’s legal protection. The chain is keyed by caller_agent_id , which is a DID or HTTPS URL bound to the principal or organisation rather than to the process, so new agent instances inherit the chain if they share the identity. Both parties SHOULD maintain independent copies of the chain. The callee’s copy is authoritative; the caller’s copy provides independent evidence if the callee’s ledger is unavailable, tampered with, or disputed. The chain itself is append-only; agent termination does not delete records. 

# 4. Protocol Instantiations 

An important design constraint of the present work is that the instantiations described in this section do not require changes to the A2A or MCP core specifications. Both protocols already define a native extension mechanism 12 (capabilities.extensions in A2A and the capabilities object in MCP), and ACAP is implemented entirely through those mechanisms and through middleware at the caller and callee boundaries. The reference implementation described in §4.3 confirms that a working end-to-end deployment is buildable today with existing A2A and MCP libraries, which means adoption is a matter of installing a middleware library at each participating agent rather than advancing a specification revision. 

4.1 Agent2Agent (A2A) Protocol 

A2A is an open, vendor-neutral protocol for agent-to-agent communi-cation [4]. Each agent’s AgentCard is a JSON document published at 

/.well-known/agent-card.json that advertises the agent’s capabilities, skills, and authentication requirements. A2A supports protocol extensions via the capabilities.extensions array [4]. Each extension is declared with a uri , a description , and a required flag. This is the mechanism used by the Agent Payments Protocol (AP2) to advertise payment capability [11], and we use the same mechanism for ACAP. 

Step 1: Declare the extension in the AgentCard 

{"capabilities": { "extensions": [{ "uri": "https://github.com/ravikiran438/agent-consent-protocol/v0.1" ⌋

,"description": "ACAP v0.1: versioned usage policy and consent auditing.", "required": true ,"params": { "minVersion": "0.1", "maxVersion": "0.1" } }] }, "usage_policy": { "version": "2.1.0", "document_uri": "https://callee.example.com/.well-known/usage-policy.json", "document_hash": "sha256:a3f5c2...", "effective_date": "2026-02-27T00:00:00Z", "acceptance_required": true ,"acceptance_endpoint": "https://callee.example.com/acap/consent", "natural_language_uri": "https://callee.example.com/terms" }}

The extension URI is versioned. When a future ACAP version introduces 13 breaking changes (for example, structured reasoning in a later version), the URI changes accordingly. A calling agent that encounters an unrecognised ACAP version SHOULD fall back to the highest mutually supported version or decline the handshake. 

Step 2: Annotate skills with governing claims 

Each skill in the AgentCard carries a policy_claims array listing the claim IDs that govern its use, mirroring the MCP policyClaims annotation in §4.2. This allows the calling agent to evaluate only the relevant claims before invoking each skill: 

{"skills": [{ "name": "analyse_dataset", "policy_claims": ["claim-data-retention", "claim-aggregation-prohibition"] }] }

Without this mapping, the callee has no mechanism to enforce claim-level gating for conditional consent (§3.2), as it would not know which skills to block when specific claims are disputed. 

Step 3: Consent handshake before first skill call 

The calling agent fetches the PolicyDocument , verifies its hash, parses every 

PolicyClaim , and POSTs a ConsentRecord to the acceptance_endpoint be-fore invoking any skill. The callee verifies that the record covers every claim and that the policy_hash matches the current document. Only then does it permit skill invocation. 

Step 4: Per-action adherence recording 

Before each skill call, the calling agent evaluates the relevant claims and POSTs an AdherenceEvent to the callee. The callee appends the event to the adherence trail for that consent record. The complete flow is shown in Figure 2. 14 Figure 2: ACAP consent and adherence sequence. The POST /acap/adherence endpoint operates in one of two modes, declared in the AgentCard’s usage_policy object. In local mode the adherence event is fire-and-forget such that the caller records its own decision and the callee appends it to the audit trail. In delegated mode the callee evaluates the event and returns an enforcement decision; the caller MUST NOT invoke the skill until it receives a permit response. Delegated mode adds a round trip but gives the callee veto authority, which is appropriate for regulated interactions where the callee bears compliance obligations. When the callee publishes a new PolicyDocument , the calling agent de-tects the version change on the next AgentCard fetch by comparing 

usage_policy.version against the cached consent record’s policy_version .It then fetches the new document, identifies changed claims via since_version ,and creates a new ConsentRecord with prev_id pointing to the now-invalidated record. The old record is never deleted. The current detection mechanism is poll-based (AgentCard fetch). For long-running workflows where polling latency is unacceptable, callees SHOULD additionally support a push channel (webhook callback or SSE endpoint) registered during the consent handshake. 

4.2 Model Context Protocol (MCP) 

MCP governs communication between an orchestrator agent (client) and tools or data sources (servers) [5]. The MCP specification as of November 2025 [6] does not define a consent primitive analogous to what we propose, and the instantiation below extends MCP using its standard capabilities object. The model maps to MCP as follows. The MCP initialize handshake response 15 includes a capabilities object. We add a usagePolicy capability: 

{"capabilities": { "tools": {}, "usagePolicy": { "version": "1.0.0", "documentUri": "https://server.example.com/.well-known/usage-policy.json", "documentHash": "sha256:b7f3a1...", "acceptanceRequired": true 

}}}

Individual tool definitions can carry a policyClaims annotation listing the claim IDs that govern their use: 

{"name": "aggregate_user_data", "description": "Aggregates user data across sessions.", "policyClaims": ["claim-pii-aggregate-prohibition"], "inputSchema": { ... }}

This allows calling agents to evaluate only the relevant subset of claims before invoking each tool rather than re-evaluating the entire policy document per call. The consent and adherence records use the same schema as the A2A instantiation. The MCP instantiation is lighter because MCP’s trust boundary is typically within a single organisation (orchestrator to owned tools). Cross-organisational A2A calls carry higher legal weight and warrant the fuller handshake described in §4.1. 

4.3 Reference Implementation and Overhead 

The accompanying repository provides a Python reference implementation of the three structural operations that any ACAP implementation must perform on every interaction: canonical hashing of the PolicyDocument per §3.1, structural validation of the consent chain per §3.2, and structural validation of the adherence trail per §3.3–§3.4. The implementation is accompanied by 35 unit tests that exercise the invariants described in those sections. To characterise the per-call cost of the protocol on commodity hardware, we ran a micro-benchmark of each operation on a 2024 MacBook Air (Apple M4, Python 3.13.5). Each measurement is the median of 200 to 500 samples; the 99th percentile is reported alongside. The policy used for the chain-validation rows contains ten claims, which is a typical size for a production usage policy. 16 Operation Median p99                                              

> compute_policy_hash (10 claims) 19 μs28 μs
> compute_policy_hash (50 claims) 74 μs88 μs
> compute_policy_hash (200 claims) 278 μs324 μs
> validate_consent_chain (chain length 1) 20 μs27 μs
> validate_consent_chain (chain length 5) 96 μs124 μs
> validate_consent_chain (chain length 20) 373 μs458 μs
> validate_adherence_trail (trail length 10) 3μs9μs
> validate_adherence_trail (trail length 100) 27 μs32 μs
> validate_adherence_trail (trail length 1000) 265 μs331 μs

These numbers are in microseconds. A typical remote skill invocation between two agents over the public internet sits in the 20–100 ms range such that the ACAP overhead measured here represents well under one percent of the skill-call latency it accompanies, even at chain and trail lengths that are conservative overestimates of steady-state operation. Two caveats apply. First, the benchmark measures only the in-process structural operations and does not include the network round-trip for POST /acap/consent 

or POST /acap/adherence ; the actual wall-clock cost of the consent handshake on the wire will be dominated by TCP and TLS setup rather than by the validators themselves. Second, JWS signature verification is not yet implemented in the reference validators and is therefore excluded from the numbers above. We expect signature verification to add a further tens of microseconds per record on the same hardware; this is a natural next step for the reference implementation. 

4.4 Demo Deployment 

To confirm that the middleware framing in §4 actually composes with existing A2A infrastructure, we built a two-agent end-to-end deployment. The callee is a data-analysis agent implemented as a FastAPI service that publishes an A2A AgentCard at /.well-known/agent-card.json and mounts the ACAP callee middleware described in acap.middleware.callee at the /acap URL prefix. The caller is a marketing-insights agent implemented as an async Python client wrapped in the ACAPCaller described in acap.middleware.caller . Both agents use Gemini 2.5 Flash as their reasoning backend such that the callee’s skill delegates its one-shot dataset analysis to Gemini and the caller uses Gemini to parse each PolicyClaim into a ParsedClaim during the handshake. The demonstration scenario is a policy with three prohibitions: a retention limit on session data, a prohibition against aggregation for behavioural profiling, and a prohibition against third-party distribution. The caller declares its intent as pro-ducing a marketing insights report that does not engage in behavioural profiling of individual customers. Gemini parses each of the three claims as understood and undisputed under that intent such that the caller arrives at a ConsentRecord 

with decision = accepted . The caller then attempts two skill calls in sequence: 17 the first with purpose = behavioural_profiling , which matches the prohi-bition’s constraint and is denied at the adherence layer before the skill is ever invoked, and the second with purpose = statistical_analysis , which the prohibition permits and which returns a qualitative summary. 

Figure 3: Caller agent trace: consent handshake (top), blocked skill call on a disputed purpose (middle), and permitted skill call returning a qualitative summary (bottom). Each parsed claim is produced by a Gemini call, and each adherence decision records a natural-language reasoning string as described in §3.3. Figure 3 shows the caller’s trace across the consent handshake and both skill calls. The handshake block displays the three parsed claims as evaluated by Gemini; the deny block shows the reasoning string recorded by the AdherenceEvent ; and the permit block shows the callee’s skill response alongside the event_id that authorised it. 

Figure 4: Callee server log for the same end-to-end session. Every interaction is a standard HTTP request against a FastAPI app, with the ACAP endpoints (/acap/consent , /acap/adherence , /acap/audit ) sitting alongside the A2A-standard well-known paths. No modification of the A2A runtime is required. Figure 4 shows the callee’s HTTP log over the same session, which is 18 the cleanest evidence that ACAP requires no protocol-level modification: every interaction is a standard HTTP request, and the ACAP-specific endpoints sit alongside the A2A-standard /.well-known/agent-card.json 

and /.well-known/usage-policy.json paths under one FastAPI app. 

Figure 5: Audit endpoint output. The linked-list structure of the consent chain and adherence trail is visible through the prev_record_id and prev_event_id 

fields, and the per-action reasoning is preserved verbatim for later inspection. Figure 5 shows the audit endpoint’s response. The linked-list structure of the consent chain and the adherence trail is visible through the prev_record_id 

and prev_event_id fields, and the per-action reasoning is preserved verbatim for inspection by a human principal, a compliance officer, or a regulator. The full deployment code is in the demo/ directory of the accompanying repository. A reviewer can reproduce Figures 3 through 5 by following the README there; the end-to-end run completes in under ten seconds on the same MacBook Air M4 that produced the benchmark numbers in §4.3. The wall-clock time is dominated by the Gemini inference calls (three during the handshake, one for the permitted skill invocation) rather than by the ACAP validators themselves, which contribute the microsecond-scale overhead reported in §4.3. The Gemini-backed claim parser used in the demo is illustrative, not norma-19 tive. Because the parser is a non-deterministic language model, two runs of the handshake against the same PolicyDocument can in principle produce two different ParsedClaim arrays such that the resulting ConsentRecord values are not byte-identical and therefore not reproducible across runs. A production deployment should instead use a deterministic parser, for example a rule-based ODRL evaluator, a cached LLM output keyed on (claim_id, caller_intent) 

hash, or a constrained-decoding pipeline with a fixed random seed. The caller middleware is designed to accept any implementation of the ClaimParser proto-col such that an operator can substitute a deterministic parser without changes to any other component. The Gemini-backed parser remains useful during agent development for exploration and for qualitative evaluation of a candidate policy. 

# 5. Related Work 

A fuller treatment of related work complements the summary in §1.3. We survey proposals by the layer each addresses. 

Single-agent governance. OAGS [12] defines five governance primitives (deterministic identity, declarative policy, runtime enforcement, structured audit evidence, cryptographic verification) but is explicitly “local-first.” It governs what one agent may do in its own environment, not what two agents agree to when they interact. OpenMandate [15] takes a similar single-agent stance, separating policy from execution using declarative YAML mandates. Both address the right abstraction level but stop at the organisational boundary. Policy Cards [16] make an individual agent’s constraints inspectable through machine-readable governance artefacts. The PolicyDocument is the callee’s equivalent of a Policy Card, but ConsentRecord and AdherenceEvent capture the bilateral negotiation and ongoing compliance that Policy Cards do not cover. 

Runtime enforcement. PCAS [17] compiles Datalog-derived policies into instrumented agents that are policy-compliant by construction. A deployment could use PCAS for local enforcement and ACAP for cross-agent consent; the two address different layers. MI9 [19] focuses on drift detection, identifying when agents deviate from expected behaviour. MI9 detects non-compliance after the fact; ACAP provides the evidentiary basis (what was agreed, what was checked) that drift detection consumes. 

Governance architecture. GaaS [18] proposes an external governance agent supervising other agents at runtime. The AIGA Internet-Draft [14] proposes tiered risk-based governance covering action authorisation and audit logging. AIGA governs what an agent does; ACAP governs under what agreed terms .

Financial services. FINOS AI Governance Framework v2.0 [13] defines MI-21 (Agent Decision Audit and Explainability) with tiered audit logging up to cryptographic tamper-evidence. MI-21 is conceptually close to the adherence trail but is explicitly silent on consent versioning [13]. A FINOS contribution to 20 address the versioning gap is in preparation. 

Privacy and consent standards. IEEE P7012 [20] defines machine-readable personal privacy terms. P7012 addresses the human-to-service relationship; ACAP addresses the agent-to-agent relationship where human preferences must propagate through delegation chains. W3C DPV v2.2 [21] provides standard-ised vocabularies for data processing activities. The Kantara Consent Receipt [22] established early principles (consent as receipt, machine-readability, user portability) that inform the ConsentRecord design. 

OAuth ecosystem. UMA 2.0 [26] enables resource owners to control delegated access through an authorisation server. UMA governs who may access which resource ; ACAP governs what a calling agent agreed the callee may do and whether it honoured those terms at every action. RFC 9396 (Rich Authorization Requests) [25] extends OAuth with structured authorization data beyond binary scopes. RAR lets a client express what it wants to do, but is a request-time mechanism with no versioning, no per-action adherence, and no re-consent on policy change. 

Audit trails. AuditableLLM [23] contributes hash-chain audit trails for language model interactions. Our chain structure shares the pattern but applies it to consent and policy adherence across agent boundaries. 

Foundational analysis. Rida [24] examines what consent means when an AI agent, not a human, is the party clicking “I agree.” That analysis directly motivates the present work. 

ODRL 2.2 [9] provides the vocabulary we use for PolicyClaim.action and 

PolicyClaim.asset . We treat ODRL as a vocabulary convention, not a norma-tive dependency. ODRL is a rights expression language, not a consent lifecycle 

protocol. It has no ConsentRecord , no AdherenceEvent , no versioned chain, and no capability-bound invalidation. ACAP uses ODRL vocabulary for claim semantics and addresses the consent lifecycle layer that ODRL does not cover. Three contributions distinguish this work from the above: the proof-of-adherence framing that shifts from one-time acceptance to per-action, per-clause adherence events with reasoning trails; the inter-agent consent chain as a versioned linked-list audit structure between two agents; and capability-bound consent that ties consent validity to the agent’s own configuration. 

# 6. Discussion 

6.1 Threat Model and Limitations 

The reasoning field on AdherenceEvent is free-form natural language. This is a deliberate choice for v0.1 such that the field is immediately useful to human auditors. It also means reasoning strings are not machine-comparable; two agents may evaluate the same clause differently and produce non-equivalent reasoning 21 strings with no way to detect the discrepancy. A structured reasoning format would enable automated auditing but would raise the implementation barrier substantially, and we defer this. The model assumes calling agents act in good faith when populating 

parsed_claims and reasoning . A malicious agent could record understood: true for a prohibition and then violate it. This is worse than the current state in that it produces false evidence, but it also creates a clearer liability standard. An agent that explicitly acknowledged a prohibition and violated it has acted in demonstrable bad faith, which is legally more tractable than silent non-compliance under a clicked-through ToS. Similarly, property S7 guarantees that a capability change triggers re-consent, but the caller_capability_hash 

is self-reported and the callee has no mechanism to independently verify the caller’s capability fingerprint. The honest comparison is not “ACAP vs. perfect enforcement” but “ACAP vs. the current state,” which is no consent record at all. A fuller adversarial threat model (adversarial caller_intent declaration that steers an LLM-backed claim parser toward a favourable parse, ConsentRecord 

replay across agent identities, and policy-squatting through an initial permissive version followed by a restrictive version bump) is out of scope for the present work. We note that analogous gaps exist in the human-consent layer that ACAP is replacing, since a human signing a contract can also misstate intent and a service can also substitute terms between acceptance and use. The initial deployment context we anticipate is closed enterprise integration in which both the caller’s principal and the callee operate under the same organisational trust boundary; the adversarial extensions belong to a subsequent paper alongside remote-attestation integration and signed replay defenses. 

6.2 Open Questions 

Three questions the community should resolve: 1. Self-attestation vs. verification. ParsedClaim.understood is cur-rently self-attested. A verifiable proof that the calling agent processed the claim text would close the S7 gap; zero-knowledge proofs of document processing are theoretically possible but practically expensive. 2. Grace periods. valid_until: "on_version_bump" blocks all skill invo-cation immediately on version change. For long-running tasks, an immedi-ate block may be disruptive, and a grace period (for example, complete in-flight tasks, block new initiations) needs specifying. 3. Capability fingerprint granularity. The caller_capability_hash is defined as a SHA-256 digest of model identifier, tool manifest, and reasoning configuration. In practice, what constitutes a “material” capability change is ambiguous. A minor prompt template update may not affect policy reasoning, while a model version bump almost certainly does. The current 22 design treats any fingerprint change as a re-consent trigger; a future version may introduce a capability diff to distinguish material from immaterial changes. 

6.3 Extensions Under Development 

Several extensions to the core model are maintained in the accompanying repos-itory as separate proposals. These include tiered escalation via a governance agent, asymmetric sensitivity preferences across data category and usage dimen-sion, structured regulatory context propagation (for frameworks such as HIPAA, GDPR, PCI-DSS, and the EU AI Act), and a plain-English audit projection layer. Each extension is maintained independently with its own README.md and 

STATUS.md and is not part of the core normative specification presented here. 

# 7. Conclusion 

The consent model we inherited from human authentication systems is a times-tamped acceptance record, and it is inadequate for autonomous agent protocols. It proves acceptance. It cannot prove adherence. Agents are capable of something humans are not, namely the ability to parse policy documents, evaluate clauses at runtime, and produce reasoning trails for every action. The three primitives proposed here ( PolicyDocument , ConsentRecord , and AdherenceEvent ) pro-vide the infrastructure to make that capability useful. The versioned linked-list audit chain gives legal accountability to the calling agent’s principal. The A2A and MCP instantiations in §4 demonstrate that ACAP deploys against today’s agent protocol infrastructure without requiring any changes to the A2A or MCP core specifications. Adoption is a matter of installing a middleware library at each participating agent, not of advancing a specification revision. The timing matters. The EU AI Act’s high-risk enforcement date of August 2, 2026 is months away. The A2A specification is under active revision by a Linux Foundation working group, and the FINOS AI Governance Framework has an open gap in MI-21 on consent versioning. This is an unusually short window in which a protocol proposal can land in multiple active governance processes simultaneously. I built a version of this system for humans, years ago at a consumer technology company. Linked consent chains, immutable versions, the whole audit trail. Users spent four seconds on the acceptance screen and the chain proved acceptance with precision but proved nothing else. Agents do not need four seconds. They need a protocol that asks them to actually read the document, evaluate each clause, and leave a record of what they decided and why. That is what ACAP provides. 23 References 

[1] AI Agent Index 2025. arXiv:2602.17753, February 2026. (The report covers the 2025 landscape; the preprint was published in February 2026.) [2] EU AI Act. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689. https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.e u/en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai [3] EU AI Office. AI Act Service Desk: Frequently Asked Questions. https: //ai-act-service-desk.ec.europa.eu/en/f aq (As of March 2026, no FAQ or guidance document addresses consent mechanisms for autonomous agent-to-agent transactions.) [4] A2A Protocol Specification. https://a2a-protocol.org/latest/specification/ [5] Model Context Protocol Specification. https://modelcontextprotocol.io/spec ification/ [6] MCP November 2025 Changelog. https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specificat ion/2025-11-25/changelog [7] Uniform Electronic Transactions Act (UETA), §14. https://www.uniformlaw s.org/ [8] Proskauer: Contract Law in the Age of Agentic AI, 2025. https://www.pr oskauer.com/blog/contract-law-in-the-age-of-agentic-ai-whos-really-clicking-accept [9] W3C ODRL Information Model 2.2. https://www.w3.org/TR/odrl-model/ [10] RFC 7515: JSON Web Signature (JWS). https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc /html/rfc7515 [11] AP2: Agent Payments Protocol. https://github.com/google-agentic-commerce/ap2 [12] Ngozo, J.F. Open Agent Governance Specification (OAGS). Sekuire, 2026. https://sekuire.ai/blog/introducing-open-agent-governance-specification [13] FINOS AI Governance Framework v2.0. https://air-governance-framework. finos.org/ [14] Aylward, J. et al. AIGA: AI Governance and Accountability Protocol. IETF Internet-Draft, draft-aylward-aiga-1. https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-aylward-aiga-1/ [15] McDonough, R. OpenMandate: Governing AI Agents by Authority, Not Instruction. Law://WhatsNext, 2026. https://lawwhatsnext.substack.com/p/op enmandate-governing-ai-agents-by [16] Mavračić, J. Policy Cards: Machine-Readable Runtime Governance for Autonomous AI Agents. arXiv:2510.24383, 2025. 24 [17] Palumbo, N. et al. PCAS: Policy Compiler for Secure Agentic Systems. arXiv:2602.16708, 2026. [18] Gaurav, S. et al. Governance-as-a-Service: A Multi-Agent Framework for AI System Compliance and Policy Enforcement. arXiv:2508.18765, 2025. [19] Wang, C.L. et al. MI9: An Integrated Runtime Governance Framework for Agentic AI. arXiv:2508.03858, 2025. [20] IEEE P7012: Standard for Machine-Readable Personal Privacy Terms. https://standards.ieee.org/ieee/7012/ [21] W3C Data Privacy Vocabulary (DPV) v2.2. https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/ [22] Kantara Initiative: Consent Receipt Specification v1.1. https://kantarainiti ative.org/ [23] Li, D., Yu, G., Wang, X. and Liang, B. AuditableLLM: A Hash-Chain-Backed, Compliance-Aware Auditable Framework for Large Language Models. Electronics, 15(1), 56. MDPI, 2025. [24] Rida, C. When an AI Agent Says ‘I Agree,’ Who’s Consenting? TechPol-icy.Press, December 2025. https://www.techpolicy.press/when-an-ai-agent-says-i-agree-whos-consenting/ [25] RFC 9396: OAuth 2.0 Rich Authorization Requests. https://datatracker.ie tf.org/doc/html/rfc9396 [26] Kantara Initiative. User-Managed Access (UMA) 2.0 Grant for OAuth 2.0 Authorization . January 2017. https://kantarainitiative.org/uma-specifications/ 25